
ĀHNIKA 1
============================================================

CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


The Types of Liberating Knowledge' (vijñūānabhid)
May that (divine) abode — the Trika reality which is nonduality (itself)
and the full (and perfect) realisation of freedom ~ from which (proceed the
powers of) will, knowledge and action that are the immanent (udita) planes of
(transcendental) consciousness and bliss, and of which all this (universe), which

is such, is the (unfolding) glory of its unrestrained power, be (ever) present
within my mind, and (thereby) destroy (all that within it) obscures the secret of

the transmission (āgamarahasya) of Śiva’s teachings.

Liberated (as I am even whilst living) in the body, by the drops of

compassion from the ocean of the venerable Kalyāna (who is auspicious good

fortune), I take refuge in him, a true master, within (my) heart.

' Rastogi has suggested that the term ‘upāya’, which literally means ‘a means (to
realisation) and is generally translated that way, is to be understood as the application

of ‘redemptive knowledge as a means to realisation’ (Rastogi 1987: 197). This
‘redemptive’ or ‘liberating knowledge’ is vijīāna. Each category of means corresponds
to a form, aspect or level of knowledge that serves as a means to liberation. So, I have

translated ‘vijñāna’ accordingly.
A variant of this verse is found in MSs G and Ch. Taking the former as the base text,

the second line exchanges places with the third in MS Ch. T have drawn the missing first
half of the first line from the printed version. It reads and means:

(yasmād eṣaṇavitkriyā) yaduditās (G: ucitās) tattatprathāśaktayo
yaddhāma trikatattvam advayamayaṁ māyāvimohotthitam (Ch: māyāvibhirhitthitam) |
yan naivaṁvidhatāṁ kadãpy upagataṁ yad vã yad evaṁvidhaṁ
dhvāntaṁ svāntaniśāntasaṁsthitam apākuryāt samantān mama ||
The Trika reality which is nonduality (itself) is that (divine) abode from which

have arisen will, knowledge and action, that are the powers (of their corresponding)

extending experience (but) has never become such (as is ignorance). May it (totally)

remove from all sides (samantār) this darkness present within my own Night (of fettered
existence) arisen from the delusion of Māyā that is such.

There is a play on words here. The expression ‘śrīmatkalyāṇavaradhi’ can also mean
‘the venerable ocean of auspicious good fortune’. In verses 8 to 41 of the concluding
section of the viveka, Jayaratha talks about his ancestors and teachers at length. There,
he tells us he was initiated by Subhaṭadatta, who was a descendant of Vibhūtidatta and
author of a lost commentary on the Tantrāloka. Jayaratha refers to Kalyāṇa there in
verse 39 and in the concluding verse of his commentary on chapter one. In his
commentary on 13/342cd he refers to Kalyāṇa along with Śaṅkhadhara as his two
principal teachers. The former taught him the Śaiva scriptures and the latter philosophy.

He writes: ‘desirous of knowledge, I found a unique teacher whose knowledge was

(perfect) and complete, namely, the venerable Kalyāṇa, a veritable abode of the supreme
good, who taught me by just (his) gracious gaze the Śaiva and other scriptures, dualist
and nondualist, that are beyond this world. So too the venerable Śaṅkhadhara, (who
taught me the) worldly (philosophies) concerning language (padavākya), epistemology
and the like.’ Note that Jayaratha is telling us that he has been liberated in this life by his

teacher Kalyāṇa, and that this was done in the only way possible namely, by a direct

transfer (saṅkramaṇa) of his teacher’s liberated consciousness into his own, by his


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

Although (my) heart is hard with the burden of phenomenal existence, I

quickly place (there) His teaching that is borne on the head of all the kings of
the earth like a crown jewel.
I am not engaged (in this work) to attain (some) unique status as a

writer; nor (am I doing this) to show off (my) skill with language; rather my
desire is that (my) thought be purified (vikalpaḥ saṁskāravān) by being
(constantly) occupied with this teaching (artha).
Some ignorant people are constantly coming and going (from this
world, life to life), others are envious, some in doubt — what should we say of

those who (can) hear that (teaching but) have not come (to listen)?

Not having heard that profound and pleasant teaching (artha), whatever
is said by others with an intense (desire to) incite (people) to act (as they wish
them to do, but) which derives its skill (only from their) own way of thinking
(and intentions) (svāśaya), (simply) makes the mind unstable.
Although my speech is powerless here (in this task), whatever
restriction may arise (on one’s understanding of the teachings is not my fault,
rather) that is (all) the venerable expansion of the Supreme Lord’s great bliss
(which both hides and reveals the truth).

‘gracious_gaze’. He thus received the teachings ‘quickly’, that is, in an instant. See

below, TĀ 2/2 commentary and notes.

I1 MS G, this verse reads as follows. I have presumed that the first five missing

syllables, noted in brackets, are the same as the verse found in the body of the printed
edition.

(dehe vimukto) evāsmi yat prasattīkṣṇekṣaṇāt |
śrīmatkalyāṇarājānaṁ vande taṁ janakaṁ gurum ||

I am (liberated (even whilst living) in the body) by the application of (the
power of his gracious) gaze. I praise that venerable lord Kalyāṇa, the teacher who has
given birth (to that state within me).

The following couplet is found in MSs G, Ch, Ñ and T after verse 2:

Śivaśāṣanāgamarahasyakovidair

gurubhir gambhīrahr̥dayair dayodayaiḥ | [Ch, N and T: cchivaśāsanāgamarahasya
]
karuṇāruṇā vidadhire dṛśas tathā
mayi dīnabandhubhir amoghabhāṣitaiḥ ||

yathā rahasyasarvasvaṁ mãnase me śivoditam |

bhāvavāsanayā sthāne karkaśe ʻpy āśu śiśriye || Read bhava- for bhāva(Just as) the teachers who, (veritable) manifestations of compassion
(dayodaya), are well versed in the secrets of the tradition (and scriptures) (āgama) of
aivism (śaivaśāsana) and whose hearts are profound, make the eyes red with (tears of)
compassion, (so too) the same (takes place) within me by the unfailing sayings of (my)
humble (spiritual) brethren in such a way that I may (thereby) within my mind, even if it

is hard due to the latent tendencies of phenomenal existence, quickly take refuge in the
essence of the secret (teaching) uttered by Śiva (there in that) place.

Concerning the purification of thought as a fundamental practice belonging to the
Empowered Means (śāktopāya), see below 4/2-7.

TANTRĀLOKA

The Introductory Verses

The Initial Invocation
Here, indeed, at the beginning of (this) treatise (śāstra), the author

reflects, by means of (this) supernal (alaukika) benediction, on (his) appropriate
(and chosen) deity, whilst summarizing the (essential) sense (artha) of the Trika
teachings (sandardhaśāstra) which will be expounded (in what follows).
A common synonym of Trika (the Triad) in Abhinava’s writings is ‘sadardha, which

literally means ‘Half of Six’. Jayaratha adopts and freely uses this term. Indeed, at the

very beginning of his commentary, he prefers to refer to ‘the sense (artha) of the Trika
teachings (śāstrārtha) as ‘ṣaḍardha-śāstrārtha’ rather than ‘rika-śāstrārtha’. He

defines the Tantrāloka as: “a book which is a collection of the essence of all the

Saḍardhaśāstra’ (TĀv 1/1) He again prefers this expression when referring to the
teaching of nondualist Saivism transmitted through the lineage of Traiyambika as ‘the
wisdom of the Trika tradition’ (ṣaḍarádhakramavijñāṇa) (intro. to 1/9) in line with
Abhinavagupta’s integration of Trika with nondualist Śaivism. Abhinavagupta himself,
at the very beginning of his treatise, refers to its teachings as ‘Half of Six’ (1/14) and
refers to the Trika school in this way in four other places (13/301b, 23/100a, 25/1, and
37/33a) and to ‘the teaching of the Half of Six° (saḍaráhakaśāsana) once (37/26d). He
uses the expression in the plural to denote the Trika scriptures (sadardhaśāstras) twice
(16/158c and 37/68b (37/68a)). Abhinava tells us that there is a specific reason for the

choice of this expression in his Mālinīvijayavārttika, where we read:

‘The Supreme Lord has said in the Bhargaśikhā: “O beloved, this is the

knowledge born from the upper current (ūrdhvasrotas). This knowledge is that supreme
(one).” The word ‘supreme’ denotes the form of consciousness above the upper current.
(The Lord) taught thereby that there is a difference between (this current and) the
Siddhānta, which has issued from Īśāna (who is Sadāśiva’s upper) face. Even here, the

riches of knowledge, made wonderfully various by mingling with parts of earlier

divisions (of the scriptures), produce each of (the many) rapturous games (of the
multitude) of scriptures (śāstra).
But here (in this case), this, the primary transmission (santati) of the scriptures
(šāstra) is six-fold, and insofar as that is so, the Trika scriptures (śāstra) that constitute
their earlier (first or front) parts (pārvārdha) are therefore adequately designated as
‘Half of Six by the teacher. (t is adequate,) as this expression (vacanakrama) (i.e.,
Trika) is not used (openly) because (the scriptures and the teachings) are profound
secrets (rahasya). (So, Half of Six is a specific name for Trika, not an arbitrary one,
otherwise) why should there not be in the same way (other variants of the name for
Trika such as) ‘Half of the Half of Twelve?” MVV 1/164cd-166 (Hannederʼs
translation).
Hanneder (1988: 191) explains that the Śaiva revelation into five currents of
scriptures (see below, 1/I8 and commentary) is integrated into a nondualist vision by a
sixth current which, ‘above the upper’ (ūrdhvordhva), is emitted by the Goddess and is
Kaula. According to the Jayadrathayāmala, there is a sixth current of scripture above

the fifth upper one of the Siddhānta which, present in the Tantras of the Left and the
Right, contains the Kaula teachings. These are understood to be the practices through

which one penetrates into the supreme reality with great force (hathataḥ). Accordingly,

the form of Śiva who governs it is Hāṭhakeśvara, who is better known in the Āgamas as


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


the Lord of the lowest hell, called Haṭhaka (Violence) (see below 8/31cd-35ab and

Dyczkowski 1988: 124). In this way, the JY seem to be suggesting that this is the same

current as elsewhere is
said to come from the Lower Face (adhovaktra) of the Yoginī
(yoginīvaktra), sometimes identified as Picu (picuvaktra, Cotton Face) (ibid. p. 63-65).
Although Abhinava seems to be using this system of classification, he does not refer to
it directly. Instead, he quotes the Kularamamāla as his authority to declare that the
uppermost current is that of the ‘venerable (Trika) teaching which is Half of the Six’
(saḍardhakaśāsana) (below 37/25cd-26). This contains the Tantras of the Left and the

Right along with the Kaula teachings, which is their essence united together (nilita),
thus making three. He seems to be saying the same in the MVV where we read:

‘Therefore because of their proximity to the scriptures (śāstra) of the Left and

Right, the stream at (their) highest extremity (prāntadharā) unfolds as Kaula.’ (MVV

1/394cd-395ab)

Presumably, Kaula here means Trika represented by the current of scriptures
above the upper current of Īśāna, who spoke the Siddhānta. In this setup the three faces

— Sadyojāta, Tatpuruṣa and Īśāna are excluded because they teach dualism (Hanneder

1998: 228). Hanneder (ibid. p. 192-194) discusses what Abhinava means by saying that
Trika is Half of Six. He does not agree that Abhinava’s characterization of Trika as the

‘pāūrvārdha’ of the six currents means the ‘front half’, which is my view (Dyczkowski
1988: 174). He prefers to translate ‘pārva’ not as ‘front’ but ‘previousʼ. Trika as the
‘front Half of Six” would mean the Bhairava Tantras of the Right, the Vāma Tantras of
the Left and the Siddhāntāgamas of the upper current. Trika as ‘above the upper would

be the essence of these three, rather than being them. Indeed, this triad is well

represented in the exegesis. Jayaratha refers to it (see TĀv 1/18). After Abhinava has

referred

to

the

‘venerable

(Trika)

teaching

which

is

Half of

the

Six’

(saḍardhakaśāsana) as the Kaula essence of the Right and Left (below 37/25cd-26), he

goes on to describe the defects of the Right and Left, along with those of the Siddhānta

and so as Hanneder (1998: 193) himself admits ‘one could form the idea that this trinity
consists rather of Siddhānta, Vāma and Dakṣiṇa’. One strīking example is the three
heads of the Trika Triśirobhairava (Three-headed Bhairava) (see below, note 1,661) that

speak these scriptures.
However, one must admit that Hanneder makes a good point by observing that
the ‘upper” current does not fit linearly with the other two which are below it in three,

not two dimensions. So how do we get to the Trika triad of scripture, namely, the
Tantras of the Left, Right and Kula? Hanneder suggests that these are the preceding
three in a series which we find noted several times in Tantras quoted in the Tantrāloka

and by Jayaratha (see, for example, below TĀv ad 1/18). He writes: ‘here the pūrva
must refer to those śāstras that are ‘earlier’ in the sequence of creation, as their doctrine
is ranked higher. Such a sequence of six srotas [currents of scriptures] is reflected in the
hierarchy of initiations. Even if the details of the different lists have to be brought into

agreement, it is apparent that the highest level is occupied by the initiation of the Trika
and different modes (Mata, Kaula, Kula) which have no direct correspondence in the
system of the pañcasrotas [five currents of scriptures], but which could, for the time
being, be treated as subdivisions of the Trika. This is followed by the Dakṣiṇa (Right),
the Vāma, and finally, the Siddhānta. As our author says in TĀ 13/321, a person
initīated into the ‘earlier’ (pāūrva) stream is authorized to perform initiations in those
below, but not vice versa. pūrvāráha therefore means the three higher parts of the six
streams: ūrdhordhva (the sixth stream [above the upper one]), the Dakṣiṇa [Right] and
the Vāma [Left]. The trinity formed by Īśāna (= Siddhānta), Vāma and Dakṣiṇa in a

TANTRĀLOKA

[EEEGTVPÉEIṜÉEEEEETJEEĪI

JTkāṁṭg raā-Taa7kṝṝ+: |
TīTTTTGTÇTTHTaTGTĪTTT
T_HÑTTTTĀGG
HT TSR̥TIT | g II
vimalakalāśrayābhinavasṛṣṭimahā jananī

bharitatanuś ca pañcamukhaguptarucir janakaḥ |

tadubhayayāmalasphuritabhāvavisargamayaṁ
hṛdayam anuttarāmrtakulaṁ mama saṁsphuratāt || 1 I|
(My) mother, Vimalā, is (joyous with) the glory (of the festival of

my birth), the ever new (abhinava) creation, her foundation the pure

(vimala) energy (of the Moon). (My) father (Narasiṁhagupta) is the hidden
(protected) (gupta) light (ruci) with five faces and his body is full.’ May the
body (kula) of the nectar (amṛta) of the Absolute (anuttara), my Heart, the
emission (visarga), which is the vibrant (emissive) state of the united form
(yāmala) of both of them (my father and mother, Śiva and Śakti), pulsate

radiantly!

second step is an attempt on the side of the Trika to encompass the whole spectrum of
Tantric Śaivism, i.e., down to Siddhānta. (Hanneder 1998: 193-194).
Sanderson sees in this appellation an allusion to the identity. of Abhinava’s father as

Bhairava, who is also frequently represented by means of standard didactic etymologies
as full’, i.e., containing all things and filling them. See for example, VBh 15

(bharitākārā bhairavī — Bhairavī whose form is full’) and 23 (yāvasthā bharitākārā
bhairavasyopalabhyate ‘that state, the form of which is full, is perceived to be that of
Bhairava.”).

Central to Abhinava’s vision of the Absolute - Anuttara — is its perpetually emissive
state, a concept we encounter frequently in Abhinava’s Trika works. Sanderson chooses
to translate the term visarga as ‘the state of absolute potential’. He explains why

(2005b: 98 note 28): “The common sense of the term visargaḥ is ‘emission’ meaning
either ‘the action of emission’ or ‘that which is emitted’. But in this higher visargaḥ no

process or object of emission is manifest. I have therefore abandoned the literal meaning
of the term and translated it ‘the state of absolute potential’.’ ḹ have chosen to translate

the common sense of the term. As we shall see there are levels of emission. The
supreme one could indeed be said to be a potential state as Śiva’s Power itself
experienced directly within him. However, even at that level it is actually taking place,
in the sense that it is the activity of his consciousness emitting itself, within and through
itself (see 3/142ab (141cd). Thus, it is also quiescent at rest within itself. In a sense, as
nothing is produced other than itself, nothing is taking place, and so it is in a perpetual
‘state of absolute potential’. But in another, it is the incessant actualization of itself as

all things within consciousness and at one with it, and so is in ‘a state of perpetual

emergent actualizationʼ (satatodita).
For a detailed commentary on this verse see Sanderson 2005c: 89-148. There are

several translations of this verse (they are quoted in Biumer 2011: 44 ff.). It has two
clearly evident meanings. One refers to ‘the couple of father and mother° as Śiva and

Śakti. The other is to Abhinavagupta’s parents — Vimalā and Narasiṁhagupta. Jaideva


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Singh presents two translations, whereas Sanderson quoted here integrates the two into
one by the use of parentheses as follows:
‘May my heart shine forth, embodying the bliss of the ultimate, [for it is] one
with the state of the absolute potential made manifest in the fusion of these two, the

‘mother grounded in pure representation, radiant in ever new genesis and the ‘fatherʼ,

all-enfolding [Bhairava], who maintains the light [of consciousness] through his five
faces /(formed from the emissions reduced through the fusion of these two, my mother
Vimalā, whose great joy was my birth, and my father [Nara] Siṁhagupta, [when both
were] all-embracing ḹin their union]). (ibid. p. 89)


Silburn translates it as follows:


‘To the immortal family of supreme rank, made of the emission whose essence
emanates in constant pulsation, produced by the union of the couple formed by the
father with the body of fullness and five faces that radiate splendour, and the mother
who gleams in constantly renewed radiance born in the pure creative power of śakti
(power, energy), may the kernel of my heart (hṛdaya) flash forth completely.”

(Translated from the French by Roger-Orphé Jeanty)


Swami Lakshmanjoo's explanation (1995: 1) similarly combines the two meanings:

‘The essence of my being that is filled with God consciousness has come from the union
of mother and father, let this, my being, vibrate in the whole universe. My mother was
named Vimalā [Pure] because she resided in the purity of God consciousness, her only
festival was my birth in this life. My father was full bodied because he had no desires —
his name was Pañcamukhagupta i.e., Narasiṁhagupta. (Pañcamukhagupta (literally
means ‘hidden’ or ‘protected’ five faces]. His God consciousness was protected not
destroyed by [the five objects of the sense, that is] śahda [sound], sparśa [touch] etc.

Abhinava has emerged from these two — let his essence vibrate in the whole universe.’

It appears Abhinava arrived at the form of this verse gradually after some

reflection. Thus, we find a much-reduced version of this verse at the end of the

Bhagavadgītārthasaṁgraha (concluding verse 4). A commentary on the Bhagavadgiītā,

it is the earliest of his works to have survived. There the verse reads as follows
(expressions in common with the verse we are examining are in bold characters):
abhinavarūpā śaktis tadgupto yo maheśvaro devaḥ |

tadubhayayāmalarūpam abhinavaguptaṁ śivaṁ vande ||

The consort'’s form ever new and the god Maheśvara, the united form
(yāmala) of that couple (my father and mother) is Abhinavagupta who, Śiva

(Himself) I praise.

The same verse without variants is found at the end of the Parātrīśikālaghuvṛtti

(p. 28). Notice that although this verse clearly reflects the standard maṅgala verse at the
beginning of Abhinava’s Trīka works, it is surprising that he could have written a verse

of praise to himself in this form. In the case of the Parātrīśikālaghuvṛtti, it is another
reason to suspect that the text is not by Abhinava, as Sanderson maintains. It is an old
well-established practice to begin a Sanskrit treatise (sśāstra) with an auspicious verse
(maṅgalaśloka) praising the author’s deity in order to remove obstacles to the

completion of the work. It may also be, as in this case, a prayer for the Deitys blessing

(āśirvāda) that the author may be inspired in his auspicious endeavour and so complete

TANTRĀLOKA

it. Abhinavagupta considered this verse to be so essential and appropriate that it heads

all his works on Anuttara Trika except the brief Tantravaṭadhānikā.

Abhinava’s Deity is the Heart, which is the union of Śiva and Śakti as Anuttara

(masculine) and Anuttarā (feminine). Equated by Jayaratha with Anākhya — the
Inexplicable — which is the supreme principle of the Krama system, Anuttara is the
ineffable oneness from which the original polarities of I-ness emerge (see below TĀv ad
3/66ab-66cd (3/66cd-67ab)). It is experienced as ‘l-ness’ — the Heart —— through the
operation of the activity of its reflective awareness, which is the omnipotent will or

freedom of the Light to be all things (as aspects or energies of its reflective awareness
and freedom) as well as their sustaining ground (as the pure Light of consciousness).

Thus, the emission of the two together is that of Śiva’s power (śakti), at one with Him.

Although there are basically only two literal meanings (which Sanderson

maintains are the only ones), according to Jayaratha many more interpretations from

other points of view can be given to this verse, which resonates with countless
suggested meanings referring to the activity of Divine Consciousness. He proposes one

other from the Krama perspective. All these meanings and more suggest the one reality
and the ultimate Trika teaching which Abhinavagupta expounds here as Anuttara Trika,
which is both the eṣsential and highest Light that comes from the Tantras and the Light

which illumines their ultimate purport and goal. This Abhinava expounds in the
Tantrāloka, which means both the Light of the Tantras and the Light on the Tantras (cf.
below, comm. on 1/247ab-247cd (1/246cd-247ab)).

Swami Lakshmanjoo understands the three meanings of this verse, which

Jayaratha proposes, to refer to three aspects of penetrative absorption (samāveśa) in the
goddess Parā, who is the supreme deity of Trika and so is the implicit object of
reverence in this verse. The first explanation relates to Parā in her supreme — parā —
form. As such, she is the pure digit of the Moon, identified with the Mother, who is pure

freedom. The Father is Śiva who is free. Their union is the Heart, which is the state of

Cosmic Bliss (‘agadānanda) (see below, 5/S0cd-52ab) that Abhinava praises as the goal

and that inspires him and all like him. The second explanation refers to Parā’s
intermediate — parāparā — form. Swami Lakshmanjoo explains (1995: 2): “She who
gives rise to the whole universe of the means and objects of knowledge is called the

‘Mother’. She nourishes all the universe and so is considered to be amākalā [the New
Moon, see 3/139ab-142ab (3/138cd-141cd) and note], which is called the pure digit
[kalā] of the Moon. She is ‘the glory of the ever new (abhinava) creation’. In other
words, although she is always on the plane of emanation, her nature as freedom is
always in union with the Light (of consciousness). One should understand the word

‘father to refer to the one who withdraws all the universe. The meaning here of the

expression ‘the hidden (protected) (gupta) light (ruci) with five faces’ is that the father,

who is the supreme perceiver, withdraws phenomenal existence and never abandons his

own plane as the supreme perceiver (even) when objects of sense are being perceived.

Thus, that state of emanation and withdrawal, which the union (of the mother and

father) (saīmelāpa) unfolds, is the abode of the venerable Kālasaṁkarṣaṇī [the Goddess
of the Krama system], which here should be understood to be the Heart.’ The third,
which takes the couple here to be, concretely, Abhinavagupta’s parents, is Parās third,

lower — aparā — form. Jayaratha does not mention this interpretation, although he does

offer three but says there could be many more; whereas Sanderson maintains that only

the first and the third are relevant. It may also be possible that, as the three forms are

worshipped in the following three verses, that this one refers to a level that both
encompasses and transcends them.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


The First Interpretation of this Verse from the Trika Point of View: ‘My’, that
is, one’s own ‘Heart’ (hṛdaya)' is (Reality itself), that which truly exists
Cf Sanderson (op. cit.), who juxtaposes mama and ātmano, understanding the latter to

be a gloss of the former, so that ātmano does not mean ‘own’ but ‘Self’; thus, the

expression means ‘the heart of the Self’. Abhinava has formulated a prayer not just for
himself, but for all of us. ‘My Heart’ is the core of all-embracing consciousness each
person possesses in a most intimate and personal way as ‘one’s own’. It is the innermost
reflective awareness of the dynamic stilness of the vitalizing, living core of our being.
Only that which ‘truly exists’ can really be ‘my own’ because it is my Self. Abhinava
prays that this abiding reality may pulse radiantly for him so that he may complete his
work, even as it may do so for everybody, for we all in the deepest core of our being are
the Deity who knows Himself in that self-possession of the highest state of penetration

into enlightened consciousness. Indeed, in the PTv Abhinava identifies ‘my’ (mama)
with the Heart itself (see following note). Sanderson writes (2005c: 93-94):

‘Through [his opening verse] Abhinavagupta expresses his own immersion in
the true self as the precondition of successful exposition and at the same time prays for

enlightenment, both for his own, that its prospering influence may sustain his work . . .
and that his audience may attain the same enlightenment in their turn . . . But the verse

also exists to empower those who undertake to teach or study the work after its
completion. We too are to contemplate its meaning in order to experience to the extent

of our capacity the nondual consciousness that alone can hold at bay the powers that
have impeded Abhinavagupta’s progress and will try to impede ours as we attempt to

follow him. The reader is invited to re-activate the awareness that inspired and sustained
the original composition, reading the verse as though it were his own, reaching towards

his true identity and praying for the enlightenment of all others, both those who are his
contemporaries and those that will follow.”

'! Heart’ (hṛdaya) is a common way of referring to consciousness, even amongst dualist

Śaivites. In the Saiddhāntika Mṛgendratantra (vidyāpāda 1/3/11c) it is said that ‘(the
word) ‘heart’ is a synonym of consciousness’ (hṛdayaṁ bodhaparyāyaḥ) (quoted in

TĀv 4/182cd-183). The ʻHeart’ is a major way in which Trika Śaiviṣm refers to ultimate
reality and supreme consciousness as that in which all things are grounded. Abhinava

derives the term hṛdaya accordingly as follows by dividing it into parts — hṛt and ayas:

‘“Hṛt is consciousness, which is the location of the (ultimate) foundation
(pratiṣṭhāsthāna) of all things such as (the external) colour ‘blue’, (inner) ‘pleasure’, the
body, vital breath, intellect and (the emptiness of deep sleep). ts ‘ayas’ are the various
cognitions like those (of material objects) such as pots that are the relative distinction
(bheda) conceived by its own inherent freedom.” (PTv p. 61)

According to Utpaladeva (IP 1/5/14 quoted ad 3/209¢d-210), as the radiance

(sphurattā) of the Light of consciousness, it is its reflective awareness (pratyavamarśa),

which is identified with the supreme level of Speech (parā vāc) as the self-referential
subjectivity or ‘I-ness’ Deity has of itself. Accordingly, Abhinava identifies the Heart

with the sense of ‘mine’ or ‘my’. Thus, he writes:

‘`‘Myʼ (mama) is the Heart, which is the place that is the abode of the

foundation (pratiṣṭhā) (and ultimate ground) of all things. All things beginning with the

(colour) blue and the like down to a louse, are not blue, or anything else if they do not

rest within (the subjective) aspect of consciousness. Thus the ‘my’ (mama) is the
perceiver (pramātṛ) from which develops the (inscrutable) aspect of (his consciousness,
which is) the uninterrupted (and unconditioned) wonder (of its aesthetic relish)

TANTRĀLOKA

(tathyaṁ vaṣṭu) denoted by such terms as Cosmic Bliss (iagadānanda).' May it

‘pulsate radiantly’, that is, blossom forth free of the limitation of the three

times (of past, present and future) and (manifest) undifferentiated by time, space

and (form and all other limiting conditions). (May this take place) by virtue of
the outpouring of the plane of (divine) penetration (samāveśa) heralded by the
(elimination through) subordination (to supreme consciousness) (nyakkāra) of
(all the) traces of (finite) subjectivity associated with the body, the vital breath

and the rest. And what is that like? Thus (with that question in mind, the
(camatkāra) (as the experience) ‘this appears to me (mama) (i.e., it is my perception).
This is the (essential) nature (rūpatva) of (the colour) ‘blue’ and (all other phenomena).
This is ‘my° Heart of all the endless number of things such as (the colour) blue. The
Void (of pure consciousness) (vyoman) (in the Heart) is where the differentiated
universe, which is wonder, is properly sustained. Thus (it is) where the Void, which is
the empty (contentless) nature (of consciousness, abides) free of its own (multiple)
divided form.’ (PTv p. 86-87). Read camatkārātmakaṁ for mamakārātmakaṁ.

The Heart is the Deity Abhinava addresses in this verse with which all his
works on Anuttara Trika begin. He invokes the Heart’s favour for himself and all others,
especially those who follow this path. Here (in 3/68cd (3/69ab)) the Heart is said to be
the Goddess, the Essence (sāra), and the supreme form of emission (visarga). In the
MVV (1/19-21) it is also said to be the Vibration or subtle dynamism of consciousness
(spanda), Vision (dṛk), the Supreme power and Goddess (parā), the Nameless
(nirnāma) and the Wave (iūrmi) (of consciousness. ‘This (the supreme face and heart of
Śiva) Abhinava declares ‘is the ultimate triad (of the Trika), the prior (state) that holds
all other (powers) within its unity. Here the contraction caused by the inhibition of
consciousness through the emergence of (differentiated) entities has fallen away, and the

three powers of the conscious subject’s will, cognition and action have become nothing

but the subject’s state of immersion in his own bliss (svānandalīnatā).’ (Sanderson’s

translation). See Dyczkowski 1992b: 44-45. Muller-Ortega has dedicated an entire book

(as its title — the Triadic Heart of Śiva — suggests) to this subject. which is central to the
short commentary (laghuvṛtti) on the Parātrīśika he translates there. See below, note
1,40.
In other words, ‘what truly exists’ is an ultimate experience not a ‘thing’, and this is
Cosmic Bliss that a footnote in the Sanskrit text explains is ‘the one (connecting,
contemplative) perceiving consciousness (anusaṁdhātṛ) of the six planes of bliss. Free
of arising and falling away, it is the supreme reality of inner repose (within pure

consciousness). At the same time, without contradiction, it is also the universal

vibration (sāmānyaspanda) of consciousness. This is the Heart in the Śāmbhava (i.e.,

Siva’s) state, which Abhinava relates to Cosmic Bliss in MVV 2/20. The passage in the

MVYV where this identification is stated is quoted in full below in the notes to 4/181cd186ab, where Abhinava expounds the nature of the Heart at length. Concerning the Six

Blisses, see below, 5/43-52ab.

' Although consciousness is in a state of perpetual unrestricted expansion (vikāsa), it

appears to be contracted or inhibited because it is identified with the grades and forms
of subjectivity associated with the vital breath, intellect, senses and the body. These
forms of subjectivity identify with their object, that is, the vital breath and the rest,

which is necessarily limited in time and space. By desisting from this mistaken
identification, we recognize that the pulse of consciousness in the all-embracing core of

our being animates all forms and levels of subjectivity, expanding freely to the highest
state, even as it contracts to assume all the lower ones. Thus, they are ‘subordinated’ to

consciousness, whereas in the fettered condition, on the contrary, consciousness is


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Heart) is said to be ‘that coupleʼ. ‘That’ is what will be explained (as the
meaning) of the first half (of the verse which concerns the mother and father

individually) and ‘that’ is (also) the ‘couple’. Their ‘united formʼ (yāmala) is

the union (saṅghaṭta), which is the oneness (sāmarasya) of Power and (the
Supreme Being) who is its possessor, in accord with teaching (nīri) which will
be explained (below, where we read):

‘their united form (yāmala) is termed

dynamic union (sarṅghaṭṭa).’ Thus (it is) ‘the vibrant (emissive) state’, that

is, the essential Being (of all things) that pours forth (spontaneously) by itself
independently of anything else. (As will be said below): ‘thus, this emission is

the energy (kalā) of (the sound) H (as yet) unmanifeṣtʼ.

subordinated to them. Jayaratha invokes Śiva’s grace that it may be liberated in this way
from these restraints. Thus, individual subjectivity penetrates into, and is penetrated by,

the supreme subjectivity of Śiva consciousness, which is at once both universal (as
every level of subjectivity) and transcendent (beyond them).
'“ Read tad ubhayam for tad ubhaya.

' See below, 3/67cd (3/68ab). The union of Śiva and Śakti is understood in this context

to be that between Anuttara (male) and Anuttarā (female), which are both represented
by the letter A. Their union gives rise to the long letter Ā which denotes Ānanda, that is,
the bliss which is the universal pulsation (sāmānyaspanda) of consciousness that marks
the emergence and falling away of each moment of its ever-new creation.

' See below, 3/147ab (3/146cd), commentary and notes. The Moon with its sixteen

phases, increasing and decreasing in the bright and dark lunar fortnights, is a common

symbol that dates back to Vedic times. It is commonly believed that as the moon
decreases during the fifteen days of the dark fortnight, it releases life-giving ambrosia

(soma, amrta) as each of the fifteen digits (kalā) of its outer lunar energy decreases.
Although it empties itself out, a residue persists which represents the one underlying

‘undying (amṛta) reality. It releases its inner lunar energy digit by digit each of the

fifteen lunar days of the bright fortnight, and so the moon gradually increases until it is

once again full. The permanent element that guarantees the continuity and regularity of
this process is conceived to be the sixteenth digit of the moon called amākalā, the

energy of the New Moon which is identified with the power of emission (visarga) (see

below 6/96ab-97ab (6/95cd-96)).
The Kashmiri teachers understand the moon and its phases to be a symbol of

the inner activity of consciousness. As we shall see in detail in chapter three, the fifty

letters of the Sanskrit alphabet represent so many phases and aspects of the activity of
the reflective awareness of consciousness which generates, sustains and withdraws all
the metaphysical principles and hence all manifestation. The serial order of the letters of

the Sanskrit alphabet, unlike the Roman, is systematically based on well-ordered

phonetic principles. The sixteen vowels come first, arranged in their order of

articulation, starting with the back of the throat (A and Ā) to the front of the mouth, with

the final two vowels, anusvāra (bindu) and visarga, pronounced AṀ and AḤ
respectively. The latter is a soft aspiration, understood to be a ‘half’ of the hard
aspiration of the consonant H. Half of that again is the preceding anusvāra. The sixteen
vowels represent phases of the inner activity of Śiva consciousness, culminating with

viṣarga, by means of which the inner vocalic energy is emitted into the series of

consonants that follow, which are understood to be condensations of aspects of its

outpouring. This is the ‘pure energy° of the Moon.
The union of Śiva and Śakti is understood to be the profound recognition
Supreme Śiva has first of the plenitude of His freedom that encompasses and generates

all the energies of creation and then of the manifest universe. In this eternal moment of
recognition and union, the energies pour out spontaneously, impelled by the force of the

TANTRĀLOKA

In accord with this teaching, ‘emission’ is ‘half of the letter H’,' which

is the aggregate of the rays (cchata) of both Kula (Śakti) and Akula (Śiva). It is
the desire (of absolute consciousness) to pour out (of itself). As that is its nature,
he thus says that it is ‘the body (kula) of the nectar (amṛta) of the Absolute
(anuttara). (By) ‘Absolute’ (anuttara)' is meant what is most excellent
intention to emit unconditioned by any purpose. There is as yet no manifest creation,

just the omnipotent force of the will to existence. This is the supreme form of emission

(visarga). As Sanderson (2005b p. 98 n 28) says: ‘no process or object of emission is
manifest at that level, and so he prefers to ignore the literal meaning of the term
‘visarga’ (i.e., ‘emission’) and translates it as ‘the state of absolute potential’.

Graphically the vowel is written as two points, one above the other —: One of the two
points of the grapheme of visarga represents the development, as it were, from that state
into the dynamism of reflective awareness which gives rise to outer emission. The other
point represents that nothing is as yet emitted externally, but is already formed within
consciousness as the ‘will to be’. This is indeed a ‘state of absolute potentialʼ, but I
prefer to call it ‘emission’, which is the literal meaning of visarga, because it arises

from the inner potent union of Śiva and Śakti. The sexual analogy is obvious and,
moreover, is extensively explored and applied.

Externally, the analogy is with the powerful exhalation at the moment of sexual
climax, or the sounds that rise spontaneously from a woman’s mouth in the intensity of
passion on the brink of climax (see below, 3/148ab-149ab (3/147cd-148). This subtle
sound is the middle level of emission (visarga), a soft aspirate sound which is ‘half of
H˚ that accompanies the lower outer, physical emission, of which the innermost form is
the pure ŚSound (nādamātra) or resonance of the reflective awareness of consciousness

as unstruck sound, which is ‘half of half the letter H’. Concerning emission and its
forms see below, 3/138ab (3/137) ff.

' Read with MSs K, Ch, J, Jh, Ñ and D -hakārārdharāpo for -hakārārdhāráharāpo.

Abhinava clearly tells us that the half of H is visarga (viṣargasya hakārārdhatvāt) in

PTy p. 201.
' Abhinava explains: ‘Anuttara’ is that which has nothing (an) higher (uttaṛa) (beyond

it), and of which there is nothing higher. AIl the thirty-six principles, up to Śiva without
Support (anāsṛta), are such as they are according to the degreein which they penetrate

into consciousness, which is the Supreme Bhairava, and, insofar as they are such, there
is something higher than them, that is, consciousness itself. This is not the case with
supreme consciousness itself, the supreme Bhairava, which is perfectly full, because it is

always by its very nature essentially the aesthetic relish of consciousness which is
independent of all things and most free.’ (PTv p. 19). The term is explained and defined

at length by Abhinava in his PTv (p. 19-28), where he supplies sixteen meanings of the
word, of which this is the first. He continues to explain that Anuttara is such that 2)
there is no reply (uttara) when asked its nature. 3) It is the highest form of liberation

(uttara) which is completely free of all impurities. 4) It is the highest level without any
higher (uttara) beyond it in the ascent through the centres of the subtle body. 5) Itis free

of all bondage (uttara). 6) There is no further liberation (uttara) from it. 7) Its nature
cannot be expressed (uttara) in words as being “like this” or "like that”. 8) It cannot be

determined and so cannot be contemplated. 9) t does not spring (uttara) from anything,

whereas the triads of 10) the Speech of Vision, the Middle One and Corporeal 11)
Aghorā, Ghorā and Ghoratarā, 12) Parā, Parāparā and Aparā spring from it. 13) If we

take Anuttara to be derived from ‘hud’, which means to ‘impel’, then ‘anud’ is that
which cannot be attained by being impelled to realise it by a teacher. 14) ‘An’ can also

mean to ‘breathe’ or live, and so by extension the Void perceiver (sūnyapramātṛ) who
impels the vital breath. Itis transcendental Śiva who is life itself. 15) `A’ means power

which rests on the supreme light of consciousness beyond Māyā. As such it is the


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


(utkṛṣṭa) because it is quite different from other insentient (mṛta — lit. ‘dead’)
phenomena that exist for only a certain (limited) amount of time. (It is said
that):
‘Where there is no fear at all, (neither) old age or diseases, no obstacles
or death, time measures it not.’
Thus, in accord (with this teaching), as it is unmeasured by time

(akālakalita), ('Nectar’ (amṛta)) is where there is no death (nṛta), and that is

beginning and end of the cycle of the supreme reflective awareness of AHAṀ — ‘-. Īn
this context ‘nut’ means inclination to creative action. ‘Tara’ means dominance over all

things. Thus, Anuttara is that in which power (A), inclined to action, dominates over all.
16) ‘Nut’ means to propel in the sense of action characterized by spatial succession.

Anuttara is unbounded, unmeasurable space and s0 is devoid of any such action. The
only activity of the Anuttara which is the Light of consciousness is its reflective

awareness. See Pandey 1963: 636 ff. All objectivity is one with Anuttara (PTy p. 81).
This is what appears to the one who knows reality. It is the ground of the power of
consciousness (cicchakti) which wields the Trident of the three energies of will,
knowledge and action. Thus, from Anuttara proceeds the Great Emanation (mahāsṛṣṭī)
which encompasses all the cycles of creation and destruction (ibid. p. 82). One with
Anuttara (A), the universe (H) is the dynamism of the self-perpetuating ‘I’ (AHAṀ)
consciousness that flows out from it into individual consciousness (M), and from there it
returns back to be reabsorbed into it (A) (ibid. p. 86). Thus, the universe, encompassed
in the entire range of thirty-six metaphysical principles, manifests by the universal
activity (spanda) of the power of Anuttara. It abides within that power and there has its
being (ibid. p. 85-86). Clearly, Anuttara differs from the Brahman of the Advaita
Vedānta in many respects, largely derived from the Advaita Vedānta’s insistence that
the Brahman is fundamentally passive. Even s0, both are ‘the Absolute’ and so, as such,
transcend all predications or notions which are all inevitably finite, and can only refer to
what is finite and hence definable. Advaita stresses this aspect of the Brahman.
Abandoning all that can be defined is the most basic way of realising the Brahman. If
the Brahman is reality, the world of definable things is not. It exists as a result of

ignorance of the Brahman. The Brahman is ultimately transcendental. It is immanent

only as the underlying ground onto which the illusory universe is projected and due to

which it exists in an undefinable manner. In this case the manifest world is
‘undefinable’ not because it is intrinsically transcendent but because itcannot be said to

be existent or not, as is the case with any illusion. Anuttara, unlike the Brahman, does
concretely (not secondarily) become everything and so is everything. Anuttara can do
this because it has the power to do and be so. And this power is its self-awareness as ‘ .

Thus, although everything objective is Anuttara, Anuttara is not objective. Anuttara is
Anuttara because it becomes everything without being any thing (i.e., any one thing)

and so remains transcendentally absolute. Even so, one wonders if in this way we can
really think that the Brahman is ontologically, not only logically transcendent - i.e., that
it is more transcendental than Anuttara.
' Another translation could be ‘it is quite different from other (kinds of nectar) that give

stability for (only) a certain amount of time.’ In the light of what Jayaratha goes on to

say, it is clear that this is not the intended sense. Note that Jayaratha appears here to

treat the word ‘anuttara’ as an adjective meaning ‘most excellent’ rather than a proper
noun. I prefer to read it as a proper noun. Cf. below, verse 14.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Kula’ which is the body, the possessor of which is the energy of the New

Moon

(amākalā).


Triśirobhairavatantra):


This

is

the

meaning.

That

is

said

(in

the

Insert amṛtam after yatra tat. The common, general meaning of the word ‘amṛta’ is
‘nectar’. It lierally means ‘without death’. The word is formed by adding the privative
prefix ‘a’ (‘'without’) to ‘mṛta’, which means ‘dead’, and by extension, ‘insentient’.

The term ‘kula’ denotes a number of things, both in its common general and technical

sense. The dictionary definition (summarized from Monier-Williams) is as follows. 1) A

herd, troop, flock, assemblage, multitude, number of quadrupeds, birds, insects or of
inanimate objects, for example, gokula — a herd of cows, mahiśīkula — a herd of female
buffaloes, alikula — a swarm of bees, alakakula — a multitude of curls. 2) A race, family,
community, tribe, caste, set, or company, such as, for example, brāhmaṇakula, the caste
of the Brahmins and padātikula, infantry; a lot, gang, for example, caurakula, a gang of
thieves. 3) The residence of a family, seat of a community, inhabited country (as much
ground as can be ploughed by two ploughs each drawn by six bulls. See comm. on Mn.
vī, 119), a house, abode. 4) A noble or eminent family or race. 5) A high station, chief,
principal, for example, kulagiri, an excellent mountain. 6) The body.

In the technical sense found in tantric sources, Kula primarily denotes the

sphere of immanence, variously understood, contrasted with the transcendent Akula

(‘not Kula’) with which it forms a pair, equivalent to Śakti in relation to Śiva. The

underlying connotation is with the spiritual ‘family’ — kula -through which the teachings
are transmitted, and thus characterises a stream of transmission as being that of a
particular Kula. It can also be a generic expression that covers all the lineages within a
Kula which, as such, may be characterized as that of a deity rather than a teacher, as in

the denominative ‘Kaālīkula’. The teachings transmitted through such ‘kulas’ are

generically referred to as ‘kaula’ (‘belonging to Kula’). Thus, as ‘Kula’, śakṭi is

understood to be an aggregate of energies working together to form a dynamic totality.
In the following passage, the term ‘kula’ is derived by Abhinavagupta (PTv p. 32-3)
from the root ‘kul’ which means ‘coming together as a groupʼ. Another meaning of this
root is ‘condensation’ (saṅṣtyāna skau). While the first meaning alludes to the
collection of the vital breaths, sense organs, gross elements etc., the second denotes the

‘condensed’ state of consciousness, which is bondage. From this general sense is

derived one of its specific meanings (which, as we have seen, is also a common

meaning of the word), namely, ‘body°. Abhinava explains:

‘(lmmanent consciousness is called) Kula because it is the aggregate of the

vital breaths, organs of sense, gross elements etc, which are supreme, subtle and gross,

respectively and also because (it denotes) the relationship of cause and effect (between
its component parts) which, as has been said, ‘makes (them) (work together) as a single
whole (APS 12). Again, (it is called) Kula because, as the condensed condition of

consciousness, according to its state, by virtue of its freedom, it is considered to be
bondage (handhābhimanāt). As they (all participate in the) oneness of consciousness

which is the oneness of the Light (of consciousness), it is ilogical for them to possess a

(phenomenal) form (vapuṣ) which does not manifest (literally ‘shine’) (as the Light of
consciousness). PTy p. 32-34

Abhinava supplies a number of meanings of the term Kula below (29/4) which

are explained there in Jayaratha’s commentary. These are: 1) the Supreme Lord’s
(parameśvara) power (śakt), 2) (His) capacity (sāmarthya) (to do and know all things),
3) (His) excellence (ūrdhvatā), 4) freedom (svātantrya), 5) vigour (ojas), 6) vitality
(vīrya), 7) the aggregate (piṇḍa) (of energies), 8) consciousness and 9) the body. See
Pandey 1963: 594-595.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


“The form of the seventeenth energy (of the Moon) is (the immortal)
nectar (which is the supreme form of emission).’

What is ‘that couple’? It is said to be the ‘Mother and the Father°.
How is the Mother? (She has as) ‘her foundation the pure energy (of the

Moon)ʼ. It is (pure in the sense that) its Impurities (mala), that is, limitations,
have ceased (vigata). The ‘energy’ (kalā) (of the Moon) which is such, is (the

This is the meaning (of the expression ‘the body’ (kula) of the nectar (amṛta) of the
Absolute (anuttara) — anuttarāmṛtakuḹa.

See below, 3/137cd-141ab, where this line appears as part of a quote from the

Triśirobhairavatantra (at 3/138cd (3/138ab)) also quoted by Jayaratha. See there for a
detailed discussion. Abhinava explains in his PTv (p. 200-201):
‘These (vowels) A and the rest are located in the (flow of the) vital breath as
sixteen moments (uṭi) with one as the connection, half of which pertains to emanation
and (the other) half to withdrawal. (This happens) externally also (where) it generates
time as the fifteen (lunar) days. In this way the moments and the (lunar) digits are said
to be sixteen. The sixteenth digit, which is emission (visarga) engaged in releasing (the
other digits), is the seventeenth digit described in the venerable scripture (whose name)
begins with Ḍā (where it says): ‘that is the goddess who is the seventeenth, whose form

is half of the half of Hʼ.

(One could object that) because emission (visarga) is half of H and also
because (half of that) as release is one half (of emission), how can this notion be
possible with regard to one letter that has no parts? If (one were to ask this, our reply is
that) from our point of view everything (within consciousness) is devoid of parts

because it is not separate from the one ‘shining’ which is consciousness. But even so, by

virtue (of its) freedom, even when it manifests with parts, (its) condition as being devoid
of parts does not cease. So let that be so here (in this case) also, what contradiction (is

there in that)?

The seventeenth digit of the Moon is the source and emissive energy of the
other sixteen energies (= digits) of the Moon, including emission (visarga), the
sixteenth. Thus, it is the immortal essence of the vivifying nectar of the moon of
consciousness shining in and through the arising and falling away of objectivity at every
moment. From the Krama point of view, the Vidyā of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī consists of
seventeen syllables. They represent the sixteen energies of the Moon arranged around
the Goddess who, in the centre, is the seventeenth as Anākhya (the ‘Inexplicable’). The

sixteen meanings of Anuttara (see above note 18) imply the same symbolism. In that
perspective, ‘the seventeenth’ is Anuttara, which transcending definition is the
‘Inexplicable’ (anākhya). See Biáumer 2011: 69-77; Dyczkowski 2009: intro. vol. 2, p.

339, also below, note to TĀv ad 5/64cd-66ab. Concerning the scripture whose name

begins with ‘Dā’ i.e., the Ḍāmaratantra, see the section concerning cited texts under
that heading.
The word ‘kalā’ means both ‘digit of the moon’ and energy. It also means ‘a part’.
Thus, whereas ‘śakti means power or energy generally, ‘kalā’ denotes a part or a

fraction of energy. The Moon of objectivity consists of sixteen ‘parts’, ‘digits’, or

‘energies’. In a more specific technical sense in Śaiva sources, kalā is the energy of
agency ~ the power of the agent to act. At the limited, ‘contracted’ level of

consciousness of the individual soul, it is its limited capacity to act. At the
unconditioned, fully ‘expanded’ state of consciousness, it is its unlimited capacity to act,

that is, Śiva’s omnipotence by virtue of which He creates and destroys everything. It is
an aspect of the reflective awareness He has of His own nature.

TANTRĀLOKA

universal) agency (of absolute Śiva consciousness), the sole nature of which is
the supreme reflective awareness (vimarśa) (Śiva has of His own nature). That
is Her ‘foundation’. She who has that as (Her) support, that is, (is Her) essential

nature (ṣvarūpa), is the pure energy of the freedom (of Śiva’s absolute
consciousness to do and know everything). This is the meaning.
‘The ever new (abhinava) creationʼ is the first emanation (that takes

place on the) Pure Path. (It is said that): ‘Śiva is the agent on the Pure Path . .

According to the Pratyabhijñā, consciousness is Light (prakāśa) which shines both

transcendently, as the perceiving subjectivity, and universally as the countless particular

mental and physical manifestations that ‘shine’ and hence have their being as the Light
of consciousness. Thus, they are objects of knowledge, which they could never be if
they were to exist independently outside the Light of consciousness. Moreover, the
Light of consciousness possesses the power to be free (svātantrya) to be as it is, both
transcendent and immanent in this way without compromising its essential oneness. In
epistemological terms this ontic power is called vimarśa. The dictionary definition of

the word according to Monier-Williams, is ‘consideration, deliberation, trial, critical

test, examination, reasoning, discussion, knowledge, and intelligence.” The literal
meanings of the word ‘vimarśa’ do cover a part of the semantic spread of the technical

meaning of the term in the semantics of the Pratyabhijñā, but not all. Vimarśa denotes

the capacity of consciousness to be aware of itself and its emitted contents. It is its

awareness. It has been argued that awareness always implies awareness or ‘knowing’ of
something. As such, the primary nature and function of vimarśa is to generate the
thought constructs (vikalpa) through which particular objects are known and specified.
Practically every school of Indian philosophy agrees that the formation of thought

constructs entails association with language, that is, articulation. For this reason, some

choose to translate the term vimarśa as ‘articulation’. They maintain that this translation
appropriately captures the other aspect of the activity and function of vimarsśa, namely,

self-awareness. They argue that although the awareness consciousness has of itself,

which is its subjectivity, is not a thought construct, according to this view it also
involves ‘articulation’, as it is a process of bringing together the constitutive energies of
‘T consciousness. This process, as we shall see repeatedly in the texts themselves, is
understood to be a kind of inner resonance (rava, nāda) and, indeed, ‘articulation’
(Śabdana) or ‘chatter (jalpna, saṁjalpa). Accordingly, the Pratyabhijñā maintains that
this aspect of vimarśa is the supreme form of Speech (parā vāc). In short, vimarśa has

two aspects. One, as the dictionary definition of the word suggests, discerns and

analyses the manifestations of consciousness; the other reflects on consciousness itself
(see Dyczkowski 1987: 70-73). Although it is true that both aspects are forms, aspects
and levels of Speech with which vimarśa is repeatedly identified, I believe that to

translate vimarśa as ‘articulation’ is misleading. It is far from the literal sense of the
word, and moreover there are other words, as we have noted, that do mean that and are

sometimes used in juxtaposition with the word vimarśa. 1 therefore continue to prefer
the translation ‘reflective awarenessʼ. This translation covers both aspects of vimarśa:

the awareness of the Light consciousness ‘reflects back’ on itself as self-awareness and
reflects on its countless manifest forms (‘shinings’), analysing and representing them

discursively. Moreover, in reality, both forms of vimarśa are forms of the reflective
awareness that consciousness has of itself, one subjectively, the other objectively. Both

are indeed ‘articulationsʼ, but they are also expressions of its creative freedom. This is
why there are three terms to denote the same power - vāc (śabdana) for ‘articulation’,
svātantrya for creative freedom or autonomy and vimarsa for reflective awareness.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


.’ In accord with this teaching (nīti), it is said that, because there (in the pure
principles which constitute the first phase of emanation She) makes Śiva known
directly, (that is Her) ‘glory’ which is the expansion of Her luminous energy
(tejas), the characteristic of which is (Śiva’s) perfect plenitude. Here, according
to this nondual teaching (advayanaya), God (bhagavat) Himself makes the
universe (jagat) manifest as (if) separate (from Himself) by the greatness of
(His) freedom, although, as (its) essence is just the shining (of the Light of

consciousness) alone (ābhāsamātra), it is not separate from Himself. Thus, it is
said that the instrumental cause (nimitta) of the wonderful diversity of the

universe is just (Śiva’s absolute) freedom (to do all things) which is independent
(of all) else. This is because it is illogical to say that the instrumental cause of
the wonderful diversity of the universe is ignorance (avidyā) (or) the latent

impressions (of Karma) or the like, as (these views are defective), afflicted as
they are by conceptual distinctions between the one and the many
(bhedābhedavikalpopahatatvāt). Thus that (power) is mentioned here because

Kiraṇatantra vidyāpāda 3/26c. Supreme Śiva Himṣelf acts directly to create the first

five pure principles from Siva to Pure Knowledge (see below chapter 9) and operates
within them. A lower form of Śiva, called Ananta, analogously generates the sphere of
the impure principles that range from Māyā down to Earth. See below note ad 8/330ab-

332cd (8/329cd-332ab), where the entire line is quoted. It is also quoted in TĀv ad 9/61,
10/224cd-225ab, 13/113cd-114ab.

Advaita Vedānta maintains that the manifest world is not fully real. In actual fact, all

that exists is the one absolute Brahman. Ignorant of this fact, the world with its many

relative distinctions (bheda) between one thing and another and the many perceivers
appears to be different from the Brahman, which is one and undivided (abheda). The

rope seen in a dark room that appears to be a snake is a mistake. No snake is created
thereby. The snake appears there because the person who sees the rope is ignorant of the
true nature of what he is seeing. The Advaita Vedāntin claims that the world is only
apparently created in this way due to metaphysical ignorance, and so affirms that his is a
true, pure nondualism. But, although the Brahman is the one reality, the Advaita
Vedāntin inevitably has to make a conceptual distinction (vikalpa) between the real and

true One and the unreal and false many. The view that the world is a creation of
ignorance inevitably suffers from this defect. It is really just a notion (vikalpa), not a
true direct insight (sākṣātkāra) into the nature of things. So, this cannot be a sound,

nondualist view of the cause of creation.

The Sāṁkhya, amongst others, maintain that the world each individual soul
resides in is the result of its past actions, good or bad. It is generated from Unmanifest

Nature so that the soul can experience the consequences of its actions — karma. This
view is also afflicted by the same defect of conceiving distinctions between the one

pure, subjective consciousness of the individual soul and the diversity of the objectivity
of Nature, which is the field of the ripening of past karma and the domain of action in
which the seeds of future consequences are sown.

Trika Saiviṣm maintains that the only view of the origin of ‘the wonderful

variety of all things, which does not compromise the liberating insight into oneness, is

that Śiva Himself is everything. The Advaita Vedānta also maintains that the Brahman
is everything but only in the sense that it is the ultimately true nature of everything, not

because it literally becomes everything. Trika, on the contrary, maintains that Śiva

becomes everything at each instant without this limiting Him in any way because he is

perfectly free to do so and so remains free. When somebody realises that he himself is

Śiva, he realises that he is as free as is Śiva because he possesses the power of His
freedom, that is, the power to manifest as all things, which is the power to be free from

TANTRĀLOKA

even though the Lord possesses countless energies which arise out of Him,
beginning with that of consciousness, this is the main one of them, because they
are (all) nothing but the (unfolding) radiant pulse (sphuraṇa) of that (power of
Śiva’s freedom). As he will say (further ahead):
‘He has only one attribute that includes all the others. Thus, the precept

(vidhi) is sound (which states) that He is united with the power of (creative)

freedom (svātantrya) alone.’

(The Mother is the power of freedom) and (so) how is the Father? It is

said that ‘his body is full’. His ‘body’ is (His) own (essential) nature, which is
free because it does not depend (unmukha) on anything else to the extent that it
is ‘full’ ṭhat is, filled with the plenitude (of universal consciousness,) because
all craving (ākaṅkṣā) (there) ceases. Thus, he has ‘five facesʼ, which are (the

powers of) consciousness, bliss, will, knowledge and action, in accord with the

saying that ‘Śiva’s power (śaivī) is (His) mouth (which is the entrance to the

all limitations. But we should not forget that this freedom is not the individual’s

personal freedom. It is Śiva’s freedom. Only this view can be free of what Jayaratha

calls ‘conceptual distinctions between the one and the many’.
Below, 1/66cd-67ab (67cd-68ab).

The expression here is ‘ananyonmukha-’, which literally means ‘not facing towards or
looking to (i.e., propense to) anything else. Śiva, the Father, is completely full and allembracing consciousness. Nothing is outside it. He contains everything and so does not
need to look for anything else to make up for something that is missing. From one point

of view, Jayaratha is referring here to Abhinavagupta’s earthly father, who is identified
with Śiva because he shares in His state in which all craving for anything ‘outside’ has

ceased by realising that his essential nature — ‘body" ~ is completely full, all -embracing,
pure consciousness. In other words, the Father is free of the fundamental Impurity
(mala) of the sense of individuality (āṇavamala), which essentially consists of
considering oneself to be incomplete (apūrṇamanyatā) and is the ignorance of one’s
own true Siva nature which is completely ‘full’ and all-embracing. From another
perspective, Jayaratha is referring to Śiva directly as the one reality, attaining which all
craving and dependence on anything ‘else’ ceases.

The expression ‘bharitatanuḥ’ whose ‘body is full’ applies most specifically to
Bhairava, which is suggested in the didactic etymology (nirvacana) we find commonly
in these sources and the Tantras. Cf. PTv (p. 266) ‘Bhairava’s nature is His form which
is full’ (bhairavātma bharitākāram); see also VBh 15 and 23 cited above in note 7.

! These primary energies or aspects of the one power of freedom can be equated with
the five faces of Sadāśiva and Bhairava. Each face is a form of Śiva in itself.

Collectively called the Five Brahmās, they are Tatpuruṣa (E. front), Sadyojāta (W., rear),
Vāmadeva (N, proper left), Aghora (S, proper right), and Īśāna (upper) (see below, note
15,337). Concerning these correspondences, it is said in the Mālinīvijayavārtika:
‘The form born of the aspect of consciousness which is in a pulsing, radiant

state (sphuradbhāva), having attained the nature of scripture expands fivefold within its
own five energies separated from one another in the differentiated state and whose
nature is consciousness, the pulsation (of bliss), will, knowledge and action, because
they are in accord with their own corresponding (functions,) and are well-allotted to the
five Brahmās that are the ancillaries (of Sadāśiva’s five faces). MVV 1/169cd-171ab;

see also SvTu vol. 1 (2) p. 54.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


realization of one’s own Śiva nature). (His) ‘light’ is ‘protected’ by (these

five) energies, that is, filled (with them as the shining of the Light) that

progressively follows on, (radiating into manifestation in accord with their

development from one to another). His (‘light’ (ruci) is) (his) desire (ruci)

that (operates) in the field of the five (cosmic) functions (of creation and the
rest), because it does not assume (any) specific (desired aim and so operates

universally). (He possesses this luminous power of omnipotent intent and so) is
perpetually the agent of the five kinds of (cosmic) functions (pañcakṛtya). This
is the meaning. That is said (in the following verse):

‘God, who destroys the suffering of (His) devotees, is the agent of
creation and destruction, obscuration (vilaya), persistence and grace.”

VBh 20d; also quoted in TĀv ad 1/73 (74), 3/172 (171cd-172ab), 3/194 (3/193cd194ab), 6/252ab (251cd) and 29/273cd-274ab. Śivopādhyāya comments: ‘If the

individual soul who is to be instructed penetrates and enters into the state which is the
Supreme Power (parāśakti) by the means that will be taught, then his contemplation
(bhāvānā) is undivided, because Power is not different from Śiva. Then he has acquired

the strength of Śakti and his nature is Śiva, which is the most extolled (of all), for this is

Śiva’s power that here in the scriptures is called ‘the mouth’, which is the door, that is,
the means of entry.

The word ‘mmukha’ can variously mean, according to the context, ‘mouth’,
‘face’, ‘channel’ or ‘means’. Jayaratha quotes the last quarter of this verse in all these

senses. Thus, it can be one of Śiva’s five faces that utters the scriptures (ad 1/1), the
channel through which power comes forth from Śiva, who thus manifests as all things
(3/172) (171cd-172ab)), the oral tradition (mukhāgama) (ad 6/252ab (251cd)), and the

channel from consciousness to the senses and the breath (ad 29/273cd-274ab), as well as
the means to realization (ad 1/73 (74) and ad 3/194 (193cd-194ab)).

Swami Lakṣhmanjoo (2002: 18) explains: ‘When you endeavour to enter in the
state of energy and still retain an individual state, you do not enter in that state of

energy, for in the end you always have to throw off the individual state. Unless you

ignore your individuality, universality will not arise, so you have to enter into the state

of energy first, afterwards that non-differentiation comes into your consciousness, then

there is no difference between energy and the holder of energy. When non-distinction
arises in you, when you feel that the differentiation has gone, you have already become
one. You feel that these are one and you feel that that is you. You are not the feeler.’

The five energies of consciousness, bliss, will, knowledge
and action are arranged in a
series corresponding to the aspects of the one energy of Śiva’s freedom, that is, His

creative autonomy that comes to the fore within Him in the process of emanation. Thus
Śiva’s power to be fully and perfectly conscious (cicchakti) is His innermost power. The

power He has to be etemally blissful (ānandaśakti) is an intensified form of the power
of His consciousness. This develops into the thrill of Śiva’s omnipotent power of the
will (icchāśakti), which is perfect freedom that is focused by His omniscient power to

know all things (jūānaśakti). It is His intention to manifest as, and within, Himself. This

then spontaneously, freely and without impediment, is His power to do all things
(kriyāśakti), through and as which the universal activity of the act of Being takes place

within Śiva Who is everything, individually and collectively, even as, by virtue of His
freedom, untouched by them, He transcends them.

The word ruci means both ‘light’ and ‘desireʼ
Theṣe two lines must be part of a longer passage containing a verb of which devam —
‘God’ is the direct object. Cf. below, 6/216ab (6/215), 8/368ab (8/367), 14/25, and

TANTRĀLOKA

‘That’ (couple is) contemplated here in this way in order to destroy the
flux of obstacles. Its nature is the ‘Inexplicable’ (aākiya) and is called the
Supreme Trika, which is the union of Śiva and Śakti. Iṭ is the expanding flow

of emission (visargaprasara) and so is the seed of the wonderful diversity of the
universe. That is said (in the Mālinīvijayavārtika):
There also (in the Heart), Maheśvara is always accompanied by (His)

Śakti, Who is His own nature. If, once (having) attained (a state of dynamic)
union (with Her) (saṅghaṭṭa),. He reaches (the plane of) supreme
(contemplative) attainment (samāpatti), then that is His supreme face, which is
the abode of the (expanding) flow of emission (visargaprasara), beautiful with
the cosmic bliss that arises from the expansion of the Absolute (anuttaravikāsa).

Undivided from the (lower) faces (and their emissions) that are to come

(bhāvinṇ) (in the process of emanation), it abides as the seed of all (things).

16/77. The expression sṛṣṭisaṁhārakartā with reference to Śiva or Bhairava as ‘the
agent of emanation and withdrawal’ is common. Cf. SVT 9/2:
mahābhairavadevasya krīdamānasya bhāmini |
sṛṣṭisaṁhãrakartãraṁ hr̥dayãt tu vinirgataḥ ||

‘O fair lady, the agent of emanation and withdrawal has come quickly (āram)
forth from the heart of the great god Bhairava, engaged in play.

For an account of Śiva’s five functions (pañcakṛtya), see Dyczkowski 1992a:

178 ff. Śaivites of all schools agree that Śiva performs these five functions. His devotees

who exert themselves constantly to recollect that He alone creates, sustains and destroys

everything, and that He alone obscures and reveals Himself by His grace, overcome all
their troubles, filled with the grace of this realisation.

Presumably, Jayaratha is saying that the Supreme Trika is A, which stands for
Anuṭṭara, the ‘Inexplicable’ (anākhya), as Śiva, along with another A, which stands for

Anuttarā, as Śakti (specifically visargaśakti) as well as Ā, which stands for Ānanda, the

bliss which is their union. Sanderson (2005b 97 n. 24) suggests that here Jayaratha is
wrong. Rather, the context indicates that the three are will, knowledge and action (cf.

MVV 1/391cd-393 quoted ad 1/18, see note 295). According to Jayaratha, the Middling
(parāpara) form of Trika comprises the triadic Trika Goddess as Parā, Parāparā and

Aparā, whom Abhinava goes on to praise in the following three verses. The lower
(apara) form of Trika is described in verse five.

‘ These lines are drawn from the MVV 1/17¢d-20. In 17cd the printed edition reads

satataṁ inṣtead of sahitaṁ found here. At the end of 19d the printed edition reads yar

sthitam for saṁsthitam, in 20a hṛtspandadrṛk instead of hṛtspandodyata-, and in 20c
pūrvaṁ for sūkṣmavī. I have accepted these last two readings from the printed edition

and translate accordingly. MSs K, J, Jh, N and T read the first line: tatrāpi

martyarahitaḥ svātmaśaktyā maheśvaraḥ `There also Maheśvara, who is devoid of

mortality, is (accompanied) by the Śakti of His own nature.’

The union of Śiva and Śakti is that of two Absolutes (A) which makes

for ānanda, bliss’. See below 3/67ab-67cd (3/67cd-68ab).

that stands

”’ One may also read this compound to mean ‘emission and (its expanding) flow’.
Abhinavagupta is alluding here to Śiva's five faces from which flow forth energies

and aspects of emanation and the teachings (see below, 1/18 and comm.). The Trika
principle and the teachings concerning it are in the uppermost face, that is, the Heart,

which precedes the others, which follow after in the course of emanation and revelation


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


That is considered to be, for example, the Wave (ūrmi), the Nameless
(nirṇāma), the Eṣsence (sāra), the Supreme (Goddess — Parā and level of

Speech), Cognitive Consciousness (dṛk), Vibration (spanda) and the Heart (of

Śiva’s consciousness). That is the supreme Trika that preceding (pārva) (all

else) is the undivided union of all (of Śiva’s) energies.

of the scriptures, because it is their source, as the union of Śiva and Śakti from which

emission flows. The previous lines set the context. These declare:

‘The Great Knowledge (is supreme consciousness), which is the (pervasive)

glory of the abundance of the (plenitude of the) rays (of its powers), that has arisen

before (everything) from the unrestrained (ground) that alone contains (all) things in
(their) nonduality. Like that it is spread forth, devoid of (the lower levels that) are to be
abandoned and (the higher) that are to be adopted, which is (the hierarchy produced by)
its own Māyā; (rather it is) differentiated solely by (its) radiant state (raśmitā), which is
wonderfully varied by virtue of (its) expanding contemplation. That is the nature of the
reflective awareness which is the Heart of the Supreme Lord. (MVV 1/15- 17cd)

! Read with the MVV hṛtspandadṛk- for hṛtspandodyat-. For other such lists of terms
see, for example, Tantrasāra p. 27: ‘There (at the highest level) the Supreme Lord (is)
full (all-embracing) consciousness. His power (and consort) is just (this, His) plenitude.

She is denoted by scriptural terms, the meaning of each one applied in accord with

(aspects of her nature). (These are), for example, Kula (Totality), Potency (sāmarthya),
the Wave, the Heart, the Essence, Vibration (spanda), Pervasive Glory (vibhūti), the
Ruler of the Three (Goddesses) (trīśikā), Kālī, She who Retracts (Time) (karṣiṇī), Caṇḍī
(Durgā the Furious One), the Word (vāṇī), worldly experience (bhoga), perception (dṛk)
and Nityā (Eternal One).” (See Sanderson 2006: 70-71 for locations of these names in
the sources and an alternative translation.) Similarly, Kṣemarāja declares in the
Spandasaṁdoha (p. 5): ʻThe Supreme Lord is both the Great Light (of universal
consciousness) and the perfect medium of reflection (vimala). His one power is
reflective awareness. It appears to be a subtle motion (kiñciccalattābhāsa) and so is
proclaimed in the scripture by means of countless names including, “Vibration’
(spanda), ‘Radiance’ (sphurattā), ‘Wave’ (ūrmi), ‘Strengthī (bala), ‘Exertion’ (udyoga),
‘the Heart’ (hṛdaya), ‘the Essence’ (sāra), ‘Mālinī’and the ‘Supreme (Power) (parā).”
Cf. Spandanirṇaya p. 66. See 4/184, where Ūrmi is clearly identified with Spanda,
which is the activity of the Light of consciousness as its shining as ‘this and that’. The
waves of manifestation and the Light of consciousness are one as is the ocean and its
waves (below 4/185ab). The term more specifically denotes the tendency or propensity
(aunmukhya) to manifestation as the conscious intention or expectancy that arises in the
initial moment of perception. As such, it is commonly compared to the first subtle
swelling of a seed (kinciduccunatā) when it is about to sprout. This simile is attributed
to Pradyumnabhaṭṭa, who uses it in his Tattvagarbhastotra (see Utpaladeva’s comm. on
the ŚDṛ. p. 16 and Dyczkowski 1992a: 291 for the author). These terms are listed
together in other places also. See, for example, Kṣemarāja’s Parāpraveśika (p. 2).

Abhinava groups a number of these terms together and explains them in relation to one

another below (4/185-186ab and 3/69ab (3/69cd)). The model for such lists is probably

ĪP 1/5/13-14 (quoted below in TĀv ad 1/181cd-182ab). See above note 1,11. The point

of formulating these parallels is to align the systems that make use of these terms that
are integrated into Abhinava’s Anuttara Trika. Thus ‘Vibration’ (spanda) and ‘Strength’

(bala) are cardinal terms of the Spanda school derived from early Krama sources in the
former case and Siddhānta in the latter. ‘Radiance’ (sphurattā) and ‘Essence’ (sāra) are

found in the Pratyabhijñā (see ĪP 1/5/14). ‘“Wave’ (āārmii) and ‘Exertion’ (udyoga) are
typically Krama terms. The terms ‘Heart’ (hṛdaya), ‘Mālinī and the ‘Supreme (Power)

TANTRĀLOKA

A Second Interpretation of this Verse from the Krama point of View
Now (we will explain) what is meant by the ‘Heart’ (from the Krama

point of view). According to the saying, ‘the Heart is the thread of energy
(śaktiṣūtra) . . .’. it is the vibrantly resplendent (prasphuradrūpa) abode of
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī (the Attractress of Time) as it threads through the wheel

(cakra) of all the energies (of the Twelve Kālīs) beginning with the venerable
(parā) are typically Trika. This kind of cross-fertilization of systems accomplished by
explaining each other’s terms by equating and making use of them alternately is already

apparent at the primary scriptural level. Abhinava and other teachers, adding terms of
their own, apply the method systematically and extensively as one of the ways to create
and express a powerful synthesis of the systems in which they developed.

Further ahead (in MVV 1/162 ff.) Abhinava says that the Tantras are in six groups, of
which Trika scriptures are the front or preceding half. See above, note 1,6 and below
1/18 and commentary.


Abhinava concludes:


‘Here the contraction caused by the doubt (that generates thought constructs)
due to the outpouring of phenomena (bhāva) has fallen away, and the three (powers)

that are the conscious subject’s (matṛ) will, cognition, and action are nothing but (the

subject’s) state of immersion in his own bliss (svānandalīnatā). The master
(Somānanda) taught this in this
way in the Śivadṛṣṭi (1/3-4) (where he declares): ‘when
one rests immersed in the experience of the bliss of one’s consciousness alone, then
such is the will (namely, that experience), such is cognition and such (also) action. It
exists as the oneness (of the aesthetic delight) (sāmarasya) of these three powers in their
subtlest form. (Now,) supreme as the bliss that is consciousness (cidrūpāhlāda), one
abides at one with that.’ (MVYV 1/21-24ab)

Jayaratha quotes these words again below in TĀv 31/124-126ab. There he explains

that the ʻheart’ in this context is the genital centre (janmādhāra), the ‘place where the
power (of Kuṇḍalinī) rises. Thus, one may understand the ‘thread of energy’ to be

Kuṇḍalinī, here identified as Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. Cf. below:

‘(The power of the breath) that originates from the wheel of the (teacher’s)
heart is subtle (and brilliant) like the moon or a crystal, it is in the form ofa line, and its

nature is sound (nāda) that, appeased, passes through the series of wheels to (ultimately)
rest in the twelve-finger-space (above the head) where suṣumnā (the central channel

merges) within (the crossing of) the three paths. There, (once the breath descends again

and) fills the wheel of the heart (to overflowing), (the teacher) should then repeatedly

recite the mantra, its light burning radiantly. Blazing like the Submarine Fire, it pours
out from the currents of the cavities of the eyes and the pores of the skin, etc.” (23/3335ab)

The supreme goddess of the Krama system is a form of Kālī called Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī —

the Attractress of Tīme — because she is the energy of consciousness that consumes the

vital breath drawing it into Herself, and with it, time (see below, 15/335cd-338). AIl of
chapter six, here below, is dedicated to establishing how measures of time correspond to

the movement and duration of the vital breath.
The word ‘cakra’ is so well-known now that, like the words ‘Yoga’, ‘karma’ and the
like, it has practically become a part of the English language. Even so, it is not
commonly known that the word literally means ‘wheel’, which is how I generally
translate it. The wheel is a major symbol in India that goes back to the earliest Vedic
period in the second or third millennium prior to the Common Era. The spoked wheel
enabled the construction of small light-weight chariots drawn by domestic horses, which

gave the Vedic people a great advantage over others in the Indian subcontinent. The


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


kāḻī (the Kālī of Creation). ‘May it pulsate radiantly!’ — that is, may we

(all) be one by being one (with the Heart). That is the meaning. And how is that

(Heart)? It is said to be ‘the body (kula) of the nectar (amṛta) of the Absolute

(anuttara). As (all the phases of manifestation) beginning with emanation and

the rest dissolve away just here, there is nothing else higher (uttara) (and so it is
Anuttara, the Absolute). Thus, it is ‘nectar’, that is, the supreme reality which is
only (the pure) wonder of one’s own nature (svātmacamatkāramātra) and so it
appreciation of the great benefits it brought inspired them to see in the chariot a
representation of the heavenly vault transported on the wheels of the sun and moon. In

major sacrifices a chariot would be worshipped in the sacrificial area and mock races

would be held. Orientated east to west, the wheels represented the goddesses Aditi in the
east and Diti in the west. From the former, the mother of the rising sun, were born the
gods — the Adityas. From the latter, the mother of the setting sun, the demons — the

Daityas. In later times the spoked wheel represented empire and dominion. The emperor
was the ‘possessor of the wheelʼ < cakravartin. He ruled from the centre, the spokes
representing his vassal lords (cf. below, 5/30cd-31ab). The Buddha came to be
identified with the world emperor and was depicted in early times as holding a wheel or
justas the wheel itself, as we find on fourth century BCE Aśokan pillars.
On this model, deities are imagined seated on the spokes of a wheel atṭtending
on the deity in the centre. Thus, the Wheel - cakra — is the maṇḍala. A well-known

example is Śrīcakra, the maṇḍala of the goddess Śrī, ‘Regal Splendour’, that is, Tripurā.
Thuṣ, in that context, the word ‘cakra’ means ‘a group’, ‘configuration’ or ‘assembly”

of divine forms. The other major aspect of the symbolism of the wheel is its dynamism.

The Sun and Moon, indeed all the heavenly bodies, are conceived to be vast rotating

wheels. The Chariot of the Sun, drawn by seven green horses that tirelessly traverses the
sky each day, appears in the Atharvaveda as a beautiful symbol of Time. In this context,
‘cakra’ means ‘cycle’. The two meanings often combine, especially in the teachings of
the Krama. Creation, persistence, destruction and the Ineffable transcendent oneness of
their dynamism are ‘cakras’. They are both cycles and configurations of sacred

energies. Threading through the centre of these Wheels is the one energy, Kāī as the
Goddess Kālasaṁkarṣinī — the Attractress of Time, who impels and governs their
rotation and the cycles of time, tiny and vast, that they generate and embody, even as
She abides in the stillness of the timeless, eternal centre.

‘ Concerning the Twelve Kālīs, see below, 4/122cd ff. According to the Krama system,
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, the supreme form of Kālī, threads through the axis, that is, the ‘heart’

of the Wheel of Twelve Kālīs and so makes this, the Wheel of creation and destruction,
rotate. This is the pulsation of the Heart in the empowered state achieved and sustained
by the practice of the Empowered Means (sśāktopāya) which Abhinava expounds in

chapter four. We shall see that they operate in all three domains of practice, those
pertaining to Śiva's direct realization (śāmbhavopāya), the Empowered and the

Individual Means.

See Gnoli 1968: intro. 45-47, 59-62. The experience of the higher reaches of

consciousness is the experience of the wonder of its beauty, which arises all of a sudden
by breaking away from the day-to-day life to savour intensely another, deeper
dimension of reality. According to Utpaladeva, this experience of wonder is one of the
most fundamental characteristics of sentient consciousness. Inert, insentient (jaḍa)

stones, devoid of consciousness, possess no sense of wonder. Similarly, a dull,

insensitive (jada) person, does not experience his own consciousness and so has no
sense of wonder. His insensitivity is especially evident when he hears beautiful music or

views a great work of art but experiences nothing because of his obscured, insensitive

state of consciousness. Thus, wonder is equated with the reflective awareness (vimarśa)

TANTRĀLOKA

is ‘the body (kula). (According to the scripture which declares) ‘Kula is the
(supreme) plane called the Nameless (Anāma), (Kula) is that which is called
the Nameless. This is the meaning. And how is the rest (mentioned in this
verse)? It is said that it is ‘that couple’. ‘That’ is what will be explained to be
the ‘couple’, which is emanation and withdrawal. Its ‘united form’ (yāmala) (is
their) dynamic union (lolībhāva). Thus (it is said):

‘The supreme state (of persistence) (sthiti), which is dynamic union

(lolībhūtā), shines inwardly within (and in between) the two wheels (of the

cycles of emanation and withdrawal).

of consciousness, which is its very nature and the power of its creative freedom, through
which it generates the countless manifestations within its own mirror-like Light (IP
1/5/11 quoted below ad 2/32). Torella (1994: 118) explains: ‘Camatkāra in its higheṣt

form is, therefore, both the act of savouring and the fullness and absolute independence

of consciousness devoid of obstacles (avighnā saṁvit). It is a savouring which in the

final analysis is a savouring of one’s own bliss, which eludes every screen or
intermediation of the world of objects, and even goes beyond that relative and

momentary transcendence that one has in the aesthetic experience of poetry and the

theatre. The terms with which it is glossed or with which it is closely related may be
grouped according to its principal components: cognition, bliss, and wonder. The first
group includes, for example, vimarśa (pratyavamarśa etc) [reflective awareness],
carvaṇā, āṣvāda and, rasanā [all meaning tasting, relishing], praṁti [immediate
experience]; the second includes ānanda [bliss], nivṛti [contentment], viśrānti [repose],
laya [merger]; the third visṣmaya [astonishment], vikāsa [expansion, development].”

' Anākhyā’ — the Inexplicable ~ is a name of the highest form of the Krama Goddess.

One of the meanings of the (masculine) word Anuttara is ‘without’ (an) ‘replyʼ (uttara),
because there can be no reply to any questions regarding its essentially inexplicable

nature. Thus, as Bhairava or Supreme &. it is the Inexplicable (Anākhya), Without

Name (Nirnāma), as is the Goddess. In the language of the Kula schools, one of the
many ways Kula is defined is as the immanent reality which is the totality (kula) of all
the energies, whereas Akula (lit. ‘not Kula’) is its transcendent counterpart. Although
from this point of view Kuḷa is Śakti, it is a neuter noun denoting Ultimate Reality as the
inexplicable, all-embracing totality of oneness.

Read with MSs K, Ch, J, Jh, K,˚T and Ḍ anāmākhyarāpam for anākhyarāpam.

The word ‘lola’ has several meanings relevant to this context. These include ‘moving

hither and thither, shaking, rolling, tossing, dangling, swinging, agitated, unsteady,

restless, changeable, transient, inconstant, and fickle. Another set are: ‘desirous,

greedy, and lustful’. In the technical vocabulary of the Krama and other Kaula schools,
it denotes the dynamic, pulsing activity of consciousness, which ‘sṣwings’ between the

polarities of its Being — inner and outer, subject and object, emanation and withdrawal

and so on - holding them together in the oneness of a single movement. In this sense it

is practically synonymous with the term ‘spanda’, which literally means ‘pulsation’ or
‘vibration.’ Thus, the term ‘lolībhāva’ is one of several which denote a state of union of
two or more things; each term representing one or other of its features. It is ‘the

condition of swinging together’, that is, the mingling together of two things that merge

into and arise from one another, as happens with the water of the sea and its waves. The
energies arise from consciousness and merge back into it, like waves in a sea that

interact variously with one another, some clashing, others rising and falling together (cf,

below TĀ 3/102ab-102cd (3/102cd-103ab)). Such is the way Śiva and Śakti are in

dynamic union in the oneness of Śakti. Thus, the term also resonates with the suggested

sense of playful love games or, more accurately, the feelings that inspire them.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Similarly:


‘The process (krama) called the embodiment (avatāra of supreme
consciousness, which is the state of persistence, arises) out of the dynamic
union between (and within) the origination and waning away (of all things).
According to this teaching, (the united form of emanation and

withdrawal) is (this) multifarious creation (sarga). It is the state of persistence

which is the (manifest emissive) Being (of all things) that has flashed forth

This line refers to the ‘supreme’ or ‘transcendental’ form of the condition of
persistence (sthiti). It is the actuality of the present, grasped in the subtle interstice

between its initial emergence and subsequent subsidence. It is the timeless oneness of

Eternity experienced within and between its alternating phases of emergence which thus
merge into a union of opposites. An example of this usage is found in this verse from

the DP 2/55-56ab:

saivaikā [k, kh: saivekā] koṭibhedena sarvaṁ [k, kh, g: ] vyāpyānusaṁsṣthitā [g:
vyāptyānuṣasthitā; k, kh: vyādhyānu-] |
lolībhūtā parāśaktī ravisṣomakalodayaṁ |) 55 || [k: missing]
prakāśānandayorantar ekākāratayā sthitā | [k: missing]

‘That very (Śakti) is one and with many divisions; pervading everything she
abides accordingly. (That) supreme power in a state of dynamic union (lolībhūtā) is the
dawning of the energies of the Sun and Moon, abiding in between Light and Bliss as

one form.
Krama practice is based on the dynamism of the cycles of the arising and falling away
of the manifestations of consciousness and the perception that mirrors it. In daily life
this is experienced as the cycle of creation - the coming into being of the Present - or as

the cycle of withdrawal each moment into consciousness —

its cessation. The union of

Śiva and Śakti, the transcendental and immanent Absolute, is experienced in the centre

of the perpetual Present between these two cycles. The practice is to cultivate a stable
state (sthiti) of awareness of the Present in the centre between the past moment that has

ceased and the future moment that does not yet exist. In this way the attentive yogi
absorbs time into eternal consciousness even as he experiences how all things stream
forth from the immediacy of the Eternal Now and return to it. This realisation is

described in the next line Jayaratha quotes, as the ‘descent’ (avatāra) of supreme,

eternal consciousness, this is the true essential nature of the Goddess of the Krama, Who

contains within Herself all the cycles of creation and destruction in Her three manifest
aspects as emanation, persistence and withdrawal.

The sequence (krama) of emanation, persistence, and withdrawal are understood as

three processes or cycles (cakra) of a single process or cycle, which is the eternal

activity of consciousness. The source of time, this activity is not definable in temporal

terms as either a process, its absence, both or neither. Inexplicable in these, or any finite
terms, the one reality is called the Inexplicable. Krama Yogis experience it as the
abiding persistence (sthiti) of consciousness within and between the processes /cycles of
emanation and withdrawal when they are experienced as one in a single ‘processless
processʼ. Then ‘persistence’, the intermediate phase between emanation and withdrawal,
is experienced as a ‘descent’ — avatāra of the oneness of Eternity into time, consuming
it into its inner dynamism. In this way, it is the perennial source of the ever-new creation

of free, eternal consciousness.

TANTRĀLOKA

(sphuritasatā). Parā Herself is the Inexplicable (Anākhyā), the Goddess

Consciousness who, by (the power of her) own (innate) freedom, manifests and
destroys (the cycles of) emanation and the rest within her own nature. This is

the intended sense (abhiprāya). As is said:

‘His perpetually active (energy) that destroys time and is the unitary

manifestation (of all things) (ekābhāsā)” shines (radiantly) within the
unfolding Sky of the Lotus of the Heart. Intent on filling it, Her form is

emanation, persistence and withdrawal.’

The ‘couple’ʼ, namely, ‘the Mother and Fatherʼ, referred to by the

word ‘that’, will (now) be explained. The ‘Mother’ (jananī) is she who gives

birth (janayati) to the universe. She is Parā, (the aspect) of the Supreme
Goddess (parameśvarī) who is at the head (ādyā) of the cycles of emanation and

the rest. As She is pure consciousness alone (She is said to be) ‘pure’ and is
this, the first ‘energy’ of the Moon, which is Her ‘foundation’, that is, support
and state (gati). She is the supreme nectar that nourishes the entire universe.

This is the meaning. That is said (in the Devīpañcaśataka):


Jayaratha is saying in this way that Parā, the Supreme Goddess of the Trika, is the

same as the Inexplicable ~ Anākhyā - the Supreme Goddess of the Krama.

Read with MSs Kh, Ch, Jh, Ñ T and Ḍ vilāpayati for vilāyayati.

The previous explanation of this verse was from the Trika point of view, with its more

Śaiva oriented perspective. Accordingly, from that point of view, Śiva, the agent of
creation and destruction,is predominant and so it is His freedom whichis said to do
this. Now from the Śākta oriented, Krama point of view, the focus is on Śiva’s power
(Śakti) as doing all this, and within which it takes place. Thereiis no essential difference
between these perspectives; they exist because the Oneis both Śiva and His Power — the

God and the Goddess, Father and Mother. Their union is the recognition that they are
one another, both together and individually, and yet both being the Inexplicable, they
are neither. Anuttara Trīkais a synthesis of the teachings of these traditions — Trika and

Krama -—- united in this way as Śiva and Śakti. And, as Swami Lakshmanjoo uṣed to say:

‘the secret of Śaiviṣmis Śakti! In other words, Abhinava presents Trika, with Krama aṣ

its deepest, most elevated and esoteric core.
Alternatively, one may read ekā bhāsā for ekābhāsā, translated as ‘His perpetually
active (energy) is one; (She is) Bhāsā who destroys time.” In that case, it refers to the
goddess Bhāsā (the Shining One). The Krama cycle of four phases (kramacatuṣṭhaya) is

sometimes augmented with Bhāsā as the fifth, final phase. Either way, the point is the
same. The Goddess Bhāsā, ‘the Shining One’, is the unitary manifestation of all that
appears as the single shining of the power of consciousness. Thus, there is no essential
difference between Anākhyā and Bhāsā. Both are oneness; the former transcendent and
the latter immanent oneness.
MSs ñ̃ and ḍ read bhāsate for rājate. The meaning is the same.
Such statements are not only metaphors that tell us about the nature of reality, they are
also visualizations for daily practice.

“ By reading -cakrāḍhyā for -cakrādyā, the meaning would be (Parā) who is ‘endowed

with the cycles of emanation and the rest’. Either way, it is clear that we are to
understand that in this case Parā, the Supreme Goddess of the Trika, is the Goddess
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, the Supreme Goddess Kālī of the Krama school.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘Emanation (srṣṭi) is above, and it bestows supreme Bliss. She is the
supreme energy (kalā) of the Drop (baindavī) that rains down (divine) nectar


Also:

‘O Goddess, above (on the top of the head, visualize) the digit of the
Moon, peaceful (śāntā) with the aesthetic savour (rasa) of the Bliss of the

Nectar of the Full (Moon).

Therefore, in that ‘ever new’ (energy of the Moon, we praise Śiva)
‘who eternally delights in emission . . ® In accord with this teaching, it is said
that She possesses the ‘glory°, that is, radiant energy (tejas) which is the (power
of absolute) freedom within that external, perpetually manifest® ‘creation’. The
‘father” (janaka) (is so-called because) He brings about (janayati) the
withdrawal of (phenomenal) existence. He is the wise (and beautiful) (abhirūpa)
supreme subject whose ‘light’, that is, radiance (dīpti), is ‘hidden (and

protected). (The meaning is that he is well) protected all around by the
strength (he possesses to) fix himself (within his pure conscious nature) by
withdrawing (and assimilating into consciousness) each (and every) object of
the senses by means of the ‘faces’ of the ‘five’ energies of the (five-fold) flux,

DP 4/3ab. The entire passage is quoted from the Devīpañcaśataka (an important
Krama Tantra, also called Kālīkulapañcaśataka) below in TĀv ad 3/66cd-67ad (67).
The following line is part of a longer passage quoted there just after that, but it is not
found in the manuscripts of the Devīpañcaśataka. It outlines simply the basic
viṣualization involved in this practice. Read, as below and in the MSs of the DP,
paramānandadāyinī for paramānandarūpiṇī and devi for devī.

“ This reference cannot be traced in the DP.

ŚS120/9, also quoted in the SpKāVi, p. 6 and SpSam., p. 9. The complete verse says:
‘Salutations to the Lord Who etemally delights in emission (sṣti), Who is always
comfortably seated in persistence (sthiti) and is eternally satisfied
the Three Worlds

as His food.” This verse sums up what Jayaratha has explained is the implicit sense of
Abhinava’s teaching, namely, that Śiva’s power, through which He generates and

withdraws all manifestation, is, like the Moon, perpetually inwardly self-regenerating.
Swami Lakshmaṇjoo (2008: p. 270) translates and explains this verse accordingly, as

follows: ‘I bow to my Master who always enjoys the act of creating this whole universe,
who is always absorbed in protecting it and who is always bent on destroying it. This is

a great satisfaction to Lord Śiva that He creates, then He protects and then He destroys.

Then He creates afresh. So, destruction is a must. There is no loss of energy. He is only

vibrating in His own nature. Without destruction, freshness would not be there. For
instance, I am in my seventies. Bodily I feel weak though internally I am not weak. I am

just like Lord Siva, filled with energy. So that energy will again be charged when this
body is destroyed and one will be again energetic like a young boy. So, energy is never
lost.

MSs Ch, N and D read sadātanāyāṁ — ‘perpetual’ and T sadānavāyāṁ —- ever new’
for sadādyotamānāyām — ‘perpetually manifest°.

“ The word ‘gupta’ means both ‘hidden’ and ‘protected’. The Father's Light is a secret
inner Light which is well protected from duality.

TANTRĀLOKA

beginning with Vāmeśī in the form of the activity of the sense of sight and the
rest, in accord with such teachings as:

‘Whatever manifests through the path of any one of the senses, by the

strength the yogi who is present in that (possesses to) fix himself (within his

pure conscious nature) becomes one with it.

The meaning is that (the Light — ruci which is the desire — ruci of the
father) is the state of the supreme subject who is well enflamed with the desire
to assimilate (into himself) all phenomena (bhāva) (and every state of being).

Thus (his) ‘body is full’. He is full because he rests within his own nature

alone. This is because a state free of craving (which is perfect freedom) arises

(within him) by savouring each existent thing (and state of being) (bhāva)
(through the activity of the senses, grounded as he is in his own unconditioned,

divine consciousness). This is the meaning.

“ The Sequence of the Five-fold Flux (pañcavāhakrama) came to be the core of the
teachings of the Kashmiri Krama school. Here the five-fold flux consists of the

goddesses Vāmeṣī, Khecarī, Dikcarī, Gocari and Bhūcarī who govern the energies of
Emanation, the Void of pure consciousness, the Directions, Senses, and gross Elements,
respectively. See Dyczkowski 1987: 129 ff.
“’ Alṣo quoted below in TĀv ad 29/113cd-114ab. Cf. VBh 117: “Wherever the
(universal) consciousness of the all-pervading Lord is revealed through the path of any
one of the senses, it dissolves away within consciousness, because it possesses just that
same nature, and so (the yogi becomes Bhairava who is) the state of (perfect) plenitude.”
The five faces represent the five energies, Vāmeṣśī and the rest, who preside over the

senses. The senses are empowered by them when the yogi manages to keep a hold of his

own pure conscious nature by fixing his attention firmly upon it when they are active.
Just as the power he gains by this state of withdrawal into inward contemplation

(mimīlanasamādhi) protects him from outer dispersal, it arouses the divine powers that

energize the senses. When this happens, the yogi becomes one (tanmaya) with whatever
he perceives by means of these powers, checking the formation of dualistic thought

constructs by the one-pointed attention that results from the enjoyment of consciousness

that they arouse. This is done by maintaining an awareness of the pervasive presence of
consciousness within which everything is made manifest. By practicing this awareness
diligently, one comes to experience progressively more and more that all that appears in
any way does so within consciousness and because of it. Cultivating the insightful
awareness that the senses and mind are instruments of consciousness, by means of
which all they perceive and conceive are made manifest, the realisation that everything
is a manifestation of consciousness develops and strengthens. Thus, realising their
essential oneness with it, they dissolve away, as it were, into it, even as they ‘feed it’
with the delight they inspire as they arise, persist and fall away at each instant.
Jayaratha is saying that the Father’s five senses operate in this way. He is the

five-faced Sadāśiva, and this is the experience of the metaphysical principle he

embodies, namely, ‘I am (all) this’ (aham idam), which is the reṣult of the activity of the
energies of his faces. This state spontaneously leads to that of perfect rest in his own

nature as Śiva Himself, the supreme perceiver, filled with all phenomena He has
assimilated and made one with His pure conscious nature by His intense desire to do so
alone.

In reality, the perceiver always abides at rest within his own nature. Unlike the object,

the subject is unchanging. The object is never at rest within itself and so is constantly
changing. The yogi chooses the subjective polarity and so is at rest, when most others
choose the objective pole and so are constantly disturbed.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


In this way, the author of the book has referred to (and reflected on) the

consciousness of the Supreme Goddess (Parameśvarṁī), which is (the Goddess)

Anākhyā (the Inexplicable of the Krama system), who is Parā Herself (the
Supreme Goddess of the Trika), who even though She is (constantly)
manifesting (Her own) nature as the threefold process of emanation (persistence
and withdrawal), by transcending it (Her) body shines radiantly (as both) the
sequence (of time) and its absence (as eternal consciousness). This is what has

been stated (implicitly in this verse). As our grand-teacher® has said (in the

Jñānagarbhastotra):”

‘She whose (essential) nature is devoid of the succession (krama) (of

emanation, persistence and withdrawal) and Her one body is (that) succession,

shines (and illumines all things). I place that Goddess (bhagavatī Parā) who is

supreme (parā) consciousness in my heart; She who shines loftily by spreading
through' the abodes of the three processes (of emanation, persistence and
withdrawal) incessantly bestowing transcendence of (this) threefold process.”

A Third Interpretation of this Verse from the Point of View of the Kaula

Sacrifice.™

“’ This may be Subhaṭadatta, who was the teacher of Jayaratha’s father Śṛṅgāraratha,

from whom he received an initiation. Jayaratha tells us that Subhaṭadatta wrote a
commentary on the Tantrāloka (see below 37/40ad (37/39)). We know that

Pradyumnabhaṭṭa was the author of the 7attvagarbhastotra (ŚDrU ad 1/17). He

preceded Utpaladeva, who refers to him. Somānanda, his teacher, as is well known,
disagreed on his excessive emphasis on the importance of Śakti (which we may take to
be a sign of his Krama leanings). He was the maternal cousin and disciple of
Kallaṭabhaṭṭa (Dyczkowski 1992: 11), and so was probably a contemporary of

Somānanda. Clearly, the Tattvagarbhastotra and the √Jñānagarbhastotra are two quite
different works.
A Kashmiri manuscript in śāradā script of the Jñānagarbhaṣṭotra is liṣṭed in the
catalogue of the Banaras Hindu University library (no B 900), where the author is said
to be Nārāyaṇa Muni. This verse is quoted in note 65 to Kṣemarāja’s commentary on

SSū 1/6 (‘when the Wheel of Energies fuses together, the universe is withdrawn’),
where it is said to be from the Jiānagarbha. The only variant reading there is śobhate

(‘looks beautifulʼ) for dyotate (‘shines (and illumines all things)). See entry on
Jñānagarbhasṣtotra in Appendix volume concerning sources.

! MS T reads -vyatirekeṇa (‘by excluding’) for -vyatikareṇa (‘by spreading through”).

” In the abiding eternity of the perpetual Present, the inscrutable power of timeless

consciousness, which brings about the arising, persistence and falling away of each
instant with all its contents, powers the expansion of an astonishing, higher state of

consciousness that encompasses and transcends them. For an extensive exposition see

Dyczkowski 1992: 25-26. My translation there of this verse is not quite the same. There

itis:

‘I place in the heart (of my awareness) the Supreme Goddess of Consciousness

Who shines radiantly beyond all things and Who, by removing the support of the three

sequences (of creation persistence and destruction), allows one to cross beyond the three
changes; She Who is beautiful, Her body one with change and Her nature unchanging.”

” Jayaratha goes on now to explain the verse when understood as referring to

Abhinavagupta’s parents and himself. Jayaratha outlines the processes that take place
within consciousness when an accomplished yogi — a siddha — unites with his consort, a

TANTRĀLOKA

Now (from the point of view of the Kaula sacrifice), the ‘Heart’ is the
reality which is the activation (samudbhūti) of (the innate) strength (bala) of

one’s own (inner, essential consciousness). May that ‘pulsate radiantly’, that
is, unfold everything (universally) properly by the development of its lucid
(manifestation) (prakhya) and (the clear) discernment (upākhya) (which is the
reflective awareness of its true universal nature) (that comes about) because it
does not assume particular (limited forms). This is the meaning. And how is
that? It is ‘that couple’ which will be explained in the first half (of this verse),
namely, the Mother and Father. It is the ‘couple’ of which the ‘united formʼ is
the pair (mithuna) engaged in the Foremost Sacrifice (of Kaula ritual

intercourse) (ādyayāga).

(Engaged in union, Father and Mother) are intent on one another, and
s0, because (they are linked together and) associated with the ascending
gradation of the wonder (of expanding consciousness), the ‘state’ which is
(their) special seat (of feelings and thoughts) (āśaya) is ‘vibrant’ with ecstasy
(ullāsa). The ‘emission’ (brought about) by that (state) is the ejaculation (kṣepa)
which is the secretion of the special (Kaula) substance called ‘kuṇḍagola’.”
perfected yoginī, in a Kaula rite called the Foremost Sacrifice (ādiyāga). Although
mentioned in several places throughout the Tantrāloka, especially chapter twenty-eight,
it is specifically the subject of chapter twenty-nine below, where Abhinava describes it
in detail. Here Jayaratha presents a simple outline of their union and how through it
Abhinava was conceived as an enlightened being born from a yoginī (yoginībhī).

The pulse of the Heart at the Śāmbhava level is the universal pulsation of

consciousness (sāmāṅya-spanda) which is the one reality that generates and sustains the
cosmic process. At the Śākta level, it is the energy of consciousness that impels and
rotates the wheels of the cycles of perception and manifestation. Here, on the Individual
(āṇava) level, the pulse of the Heart is the ‘exertion’ of the ‘strength’ which is the force
of consciousness that impels the energies that vitalize the body, senses, mind and the
vital breath, through which the reflective awareness of the true nature of all things as the

manifestation of consciousness develops and ultimately unfolds, free of all limitations.
Jayaratha here explains in this way that Abhinava was born from sexual union
practiced in the course of worship by adepts initiated into Kaula ritual, as described

below in chapter twenty-nine and in chapter twenty-two of the Tantrasāra (see TĀ

29/111cd-127cd and TSā p. 202-203). For them the climax of union mirrors the supreme
emission (visarga) of Śiva and Śakti, so that what is said of one applies equally to the

other. It is this immersion in the supreme emission which, distinguishing their union
from that of others, even as it enlightens them, generates an enlightened being.

One wonders if it is better to read with MS K āśrayaviśeṣaḥ (the state which is) ‘a
special support / foundation’ for āśayaviśeṣaḥ.

Cf. below, TĀv ad 29/50. In common parlance ‘kuṇḍagola’ is the name of a gruel

made of sour rice. It also means a person who is both an adulterine (kuṇḍa) and the son

of a widow (gola). In the Tantras it is a technical term denoting a special sacrificial

substance generated from the mingling of male and female sexual fluids produced at the
climax of ritual intercourse (see below, TĀv ad 15/166cd-167ab). The mixture of the

male sperm and the woman’s menstrual blood drawn from the woman’s sexual organ
(kuṇḍa) after intercourse, is mixed together with ash or some other inert substance to

make a ball (gola). This is kept for the rite when required, when it is dissolved into the

wine in the sacrificial vessel. This mixture is considered to be the most powerful Kula
substance (dravya). In this context, it is emission understood as the ejaculate which is


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


That is its (material) nature (prakṛti). Thus, in accord with the statement ‘within

Kula which is the field of creation . . .” Kula is its form within the ‘nectar°,

that is, the (emitted) essence, which is the ‘Absolute’ (anuttara), that is, most
excellent, because by contemplating (anusaṁdhāna) that it is made of the deity,

secreted from the body. It is the ‘nectar associated with the divine form (mūrti) of the

Gesture of the Six-spoked (Wheel) (i.., the united bodily form of the partners engaged
in the rite of sexual union) (see below, TĀv ad 3/95ab (3/95) and also 15/166cd,

170cd-171ab). Iṭis also said to be the libation (argha) produced by the union with Śakti,

the partner of the sexual rite (below, comm. on 29/15) and the fruit of bliss (of sexual
union) with which ‘the vessel of the libation’ (arghapātra) should be filled (below, TĀv
ad 29/22ab), by passing it from the mouth of one partner to the other back and forth
(below, 29/126-129). It may be eaten as sacrificial food (caru) (below, TĀv ad
13/228ab).
The production and consumption of kuṇḍagola may be a part of Kauḷa ritual,
although, as one would expect, it is often sublimated, or symbolic substitutes offered in

its place. An example of the practice of Kaula ritual intercourse (maithuna) aimed at its
production and consumption, which appears to have been literally prescribed, is taken

from a section of the Manthānabhairavatantra of the Kubjikā tradition. This rite is also
called Śāntayoga (Tranquil Union) or Bhagayāga (the Sacrifice to the Female Organ).
The maṇḍala is drawn first and food offerings are made to the deities in it and the Kaula
partner. The text continues:

‘Once (the female partner) has been made blissful with mantras, worship the
secret place (guhyasthāna) (i.e., the female sexual organ). Consecrating the Liṅga (the

male sexual organ) with its three seed-syllables, touch it. O Lord of the gods, first of all,
insert the right index finger. Move the tongue around there and insert the Liṅga. Then

by means of (the movement of the vital breath called) the Weapon of Intercourse
(helādaṇḍanaya) merge into the supreme power. Contemplate one’s own Self in the
form of Bhairava and that beautiful Yoni (bhaga). The expert should kiss (the consort's)
eyes and ears with vigour (yatnār) and slowly kiss (her) navel, heart, and throat. O Lord
of the gods, one should contemplate the divine form (mirti) (of the Yoni) until it flows
(with sexual juices). Then having produced the mixture of male and female fluids
(kuṇḍagola) along with the five nectars (of the bodily secretions) and worshipped the
Krama (maṇḍala) and the scripture, O Bhairava, the Kula yogi, along with (his) partner
(dūtī), should eat it with effort.’ YKh (2) 12/7-12. See also, Dupuche 2003: 90-91 and

notes.
” Read with MS Ch, I, Ih, T, and Ḍ kula upattigocare — ‘within Kula which is the field

of creation’ for kulam utpattigocaraḥ ‘Kula is the field of creation . . .’ This sentence is

also quoted below in TAv ad 4/57-58ab. Although we find the latter reading, as here,
Jayaratha’s remark there justifies emendation. Thus, he writes: “(oneness is attained)

within Kula, that is, in accord with the dictum, ‘Kula is the field of creation

(utpattigocara) (sic > within Kula which is the field of creation . . .) (it is attained)
everywhere here within (all that is) of the nature of subject and object that arises
(continuously) by a process of separation from one’s own (true innate) nature.”

Jayaratha’s explanation presents Kula as the one all-embracing reality which
encompasses the polarities of subject and object in the one unitary consciousness that is

one’s own essential nature. Here, Kula denotes its physical, microcosmic counterpart
comprised of the united opposites of the male and female seed that together are ‘the
field of creation.

TANTRĀLOKA

which is white (as Śiva) and red (as Śakti) and the like, it is quite different from

the semen and ovum of the fettered (paśu).”

What is ‘that couple’? It is said that (it is) the ‘Mother and Fatherʼ.
How is the Mother? Her ‘foundation is pure (vimala) energy’. She is the
‘pure’ energy of the letters (varṇakalā) and that is her ‘foundation’, that is,

support (ālambana). Thus (Abhinavagupta’s mother) is called ‘Vimalā’" and

(Hers) is ‘the glory (of the festival of my birth and) of the ever new

(abhinava) creation’. (These words also refer to the) ‘creation’, that is, birth of

the ‘ever new’ (abhinava), that is, the venerable Abhinavagupta. (Concerning
which it is said):

‘His fathers rejoice as do his grandfathers. Today (an aspect) of the

Great Lord is born and he will save us (all)!”

In accord with such sayings, her ‘glory’ (mahaḥ) is the festival (that

takes place) due to the birth of a true (and good) son because, as the

accomplishment of a goal, it induces an extraordinary (sense of) wonder.™ And

so how is the Father? ‘His secret (gupta) Light is adorned with five faces’.

‘Pañcamukha’ (‘five faces’) is (one of the words for) ‘lion’ —— siṁha. The name
Siṁhagupta (indicates that) he possesses the ‘Light’, that is, the brilliance
which is (his) perception (prathā) everywhere (of all things around him).

”” Another of the many things termed ‘kula’ is this most specifically Kaula sacrificial

substance. See below, 29/126-129. Jayaratha is commenting on the words ‘the Family
(Kula) of the nectar (amṛta) of the Absolute (anuttara). In this case Kula is the
outpouring of the oneness of the manifestation of subject and object within the Absolute

that takes place by the union of Śiva and Śakṭi, identified with the seed of Abhinava’s
parents.
The letters are the energies or aspects of pure ‘I’ consciousness (ahar). Sanderson

(op. cit.) understands this to be a plural, meaning ‘having the sound elements
(varṇakalāḥ), vi-, ma, and lā as her basis’. Paramhaṁsa Miśra understands this to mean

that Abhinavagupta’s mother is like Sarasvatī, the goddess of the arts and learning,
because Sarasvatī wears a garland of letters and so is their ‘foundation’. In other words,
Abhinava’s mother was a learned and talented woman.
‘! Read vimalābhidhānā for vimalakalābhiáhānā. Thīs emendation, suggested by
Sanderson, ,̃ supported by the commentary called Bhāskarī on the opening verse of the

ĪPv (vol. , p. 7): ʻSupreme Śiva is called Narasiṁhagupta, who is the father (of
JFÉhĀHĀ (His) consort (śakti) is called Vimalā and is the mother.” Jayaratha
himself states further ahead: ‘The teachers (explain that) the parents of the author are
called the venerable Narṇsiṁhagupta and Vimalā.
Thuṣ, the name means ‘ever new’ (abhinava) `secret (gupta).

The word mahaḥ means both ‘glory and ‘festival’
Instead of camatkā
śayakārirvna MSs Ch, J, Jh, Ñ T and Ḍ read

camatkārātīśayatvena,i.e., ‘it is an extraordinary (sense of) wonderʼ.
A lionis said to have ‘five faces’ andis called ‘īve faced’ because he looks aroundin
the four directions and above when he walks. In the same way, the father perceives

everything everywhere around him with the senses of his faces


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘His son was Narasiṁhagupta, well known amongst men as Cukhulaka,

his intellect pure (as) the moon.

Thus, from the point of view which will be stated (further ahead with

this line), he is known by the name of Narasiṁhagupta. This is the meaning.

According to (our) teachers, the parents of the author are called the venerable

Narasiṁhagupta and Vimalā. In accord with the rule that: “parts of a word (may
be) uṣed in (the place of complete) words’ʼ, just as (we may call) Bhīmasena

Bhīma, similarly here also (both) names, Narasiṁhagupta and (the abbreviated

form) Siṁhagupta, are used. (His and her) ‘body is full.’

‘(Each) should meditate on (their) mutual nature (rāpa), which is Śiva

and Śakti, and not entertain human ideas (of each other) involving attachment,

delusion or the like. Everything should be done by the most excellent adepts as
the contemplation of cognitive consciousness (jñānabhāvanā).’

As both, in accord with this declared view, are (equally) to be
considered to be denoted (abhidhāna) as consisting of the penetration of Śiva
and Śakti, (the same is) applicable (equally) to both (Śiva and Śakti,
Abhinavagupta’s father and mother,) in accord with the dictum of the ‘eye of a

crowʼ, (and so the body of both is penetrated by full and perfect

consciousness). (lt is said that):

‘He whose body is formed in the womb from the embryo (conceived)
by such a union is called ‘born of a Yoginī’ (yoginībhū). (Such a one) is
spontaneously Rudra (Himself) and possesses knowledge (of ultimate reality).

This line is TĀ 37/54ab. See notes there. The spelling of the father’s name there is

Cukhalaka.
' The partners engaged in the spiritual practice of sexual union should think of each
other as Siva and Śtki that is, as the one universal subjectivity, without being

overcome by desire and delusion at the lower embodied level. Everything they do

should be a form of meditation on consciousness. In this way, their union generates a
higher level of consciousness from which is born an enlightened being. This passage is
also quoted below in TĀv ad 29/101cd-102.
“ Itis a common Indian traditional belief that a crow only has one eye. When it shifts its

head, the eye moves from one side of its beak to the other. The maxim of the eye of a
crow (kākākṣinyāya) describes how the same word can be used with more than one
meaning or application, at the same time by qualifying both what follows (in this case
‘the father’) and what precedes (‘the mother’). Cf. below, comm. 1/50-51.

This verse is quoted below as 29/162cd-163ab. The following line tells us it is drawn

from the Viīrāvalīkula: ʻ According to the venerable Virāvalīśāstra, he who is such is
equal to Śiva, even though he is still a baby in (his) mother’s womb.’ 29/163cd. Read, as
we find there, rudraḥ for bhaktaḥ.

The claim here is that Abhinavagupta was born from the union of an

enlightened yoginī and siddha. Thus, saying that he was ‘born of a yoginī’ means that he
was born in an advanced spiritual state close to liberation. Cf. PT 10 etan nāyoginījāto
nāṟudro labhate sphuṭam | hṛdayaṁ devadevasya sadyoyogovimokṣadam || ‘It is clear
that one who is not born of a Yoginī and is not Rudra cannot attain the heart of the God
of the gods that immediately bestows Yoga and liberation.’

TANTRĀLOKA

Born from the union of parents who are in this way like a Siddha and a
Yoginī, in accord with this view, the author, who has assumed within himself
the status of one who is a (fit and authoritative) vessel for the nondual

knowledge of the highest plane, is (in this way) confirmed to (possess) the
authority to write (this) book, which is a compendium (saṁgraha) of the

essence of the entire Trika teaching (ṣadaráhaśāstra).
Although there are other possible explanations here (of this verse), these
have not been given for fear of making the book too long, and also because they
are of no aid to the subject in hand (prakṛta) (which is the elucidation of its
meaning). Although other commentaries by some others are very incorrect,
(even so I have) not made that known (prakāśita) because (it is said) in this
regard (in the Devyāyāmala) that:

soy

‘((The disciple) should not criticize the teacher) nor find reason (to do

Thus, in accord with this view, which will be stated further ahead, it is
said that (sowing) the seed of criticism of great teachers who are great souls
brings upon oneself (the sin) of transgressing the Rule (samaya).! Who is it that
commencing a rite of pacification would arouse a demon? We do this (i.e., write
our own commentary) because the essence of the mass (of other) commentaries
has been acknowledged” (and understood). May the intelligent discern by
themselves how the others are in every case devoid of (the true) essence (of the
teachings). Now enough of (this) talk. We will discuss here the matter in hand.

This quarter verse is part of a passage quoted below (15/540d (15/537d)) from the
Deyyāyāmala listing the pledges (samaya) the Kaula initiate should make and observe.
The complete sentence reads: guror nindāṁ na kurvīta tasyai hetuṁ na cācaret |

! A note at the bottom of the page explains that: “bringing upon (oneself the sin) of

transgressing the rule’ is causing the state to arise (of one who has) fallen from right
conduct. (An example of) ‘the seed of criticism of great teachersʼ (is the following).
Some stupid people argue that the ‘pure energy (of the Moon) is the sixteenth lunar
day, which is the pure (lunar) digit within which all the stain of impurity has been
removed. In other words, it is the (digit) called the New Moon (amāvasyā). This is itself
the ‘new creation’, that is, the creation of the fifteen energies (of the Moon). (They also
explain that the Mother) is exertion there and (that her) body is full. (They say that the
meaning of the statement that the Father’s) ‘secret (gupta) Light is adorned with five
facesʼ (is as follows). A day consists of five periods of three hours (yāma) and the night,
three. Thus, assuming (this point of view), (they explain that) the meaning is that the
day has five faces and that there (in that case) the ‘secret light’ is the desire for what he
has seen (in the previous lunar cycle) (īkṣitābhilāṣa), that is, the beginning of the day of
the New Moon (amāvasyā). The ‘seed of criticism’ (may exist) from the point of view
of medicine or astrology, but not from the point of view of Anuttara. There (according
to that view), as the day of the New Moon and the beginning (of the lunar cycle) must
be protected, it is a boon (vara) and so is pleasing (sahṛdayā). Such is the authority
(pramāṇa) here (for this explanation).”

Correct pratijñātattvāt to pratijñātatvāt.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


In Praise of the Deities

Having reflected on that Supreme Trika in this way, beginning to reflect

on the intermediate (parāpara) one also,” he thus contemplates the Goddess
Parā first of all.

TTHTTTTĀĪYTGTĀJTĒTTTGṬ
ÁI 3 |I
naumi citpratibhāṁ devīṁ parāṁ bhairavayoginīm |
mātṛmānaprameyāṁśaśūlāmbujakṛtāspadām || 2 ||

“T bow to the goddess Parā (the Supreme One), who is the creative

intuition of consciousness (citpratibhā).° Bhairava’s Yoginī (united with

Him) (bhairavayoginī), She has made (her) place on (top of) the lotuses (of
the Trika Trident, the) prongs” of which are the aspects (of perception,
namely) subject, object and means of knowledge.”
There are three forms of the Trika triad. The supreme (para) one is described in verse

one. The middling one, (parāpara) is in the following three verses, and the lower in
verse five. The first verse represents the supreme aspect of the triad of Śiva, Śakṭi and
Nara, which is the lower (apara) form of Trika. At the intermediate level it is the three
Goddesses, Supreme (Parā), Middling (Parāparā) and Lower (Aparā) set in
correspondence to the perceiver, means and object of knowledge praised in the
following three verses. They also embody Śiva’s three powers of will, knowledge and
action, which in the supreme triad dissolve away into bliss (cf. MVV 1/20cd-21). The
lower form is described in verse five as Śiva, Śakti and Nara (the individual soul and
manifest universe) understood as three phases in the process of emanation.

Swami Lakṣhmanjoo translates: ‘I bow to that supreme Parā energy who is the light of
consciousness and is one with supreme Bhairava. That energy that is established in the

three lotuses, on the three parts — (subjective, cognitive and objective consciousness)
that is its Pratibhā.

’ One could also translate ‘pratibhā’ as ‘ligh’, and so the meaning would be that Parā

is the ‘light of consciousnes
Concerning the creative intuition (pratibhā) of
consciousness, see below, 3/68ab-68cd (3/68cd-69ab), 10/209-211, and 11/76cd-78ab
and note. Abhinava supplies the Vidyās of Parāparā in 30/20-26ab, Aparā in 30/26cd,

and Parā in 30/27-28ab. The latter is the syllable SAUḤ, which is identified with the
Heart (see below, 4/181¢cd-182ab). Thus, Abhinava is invoking Parā in the first verse
also to be active as the creative intuition (pratibhā) of his consciousness.

“ Several varieties of the Trika maṇḍala are taught in the Trika Tantras. The basic form

is Śiva’s Trident, which may be elaborated to form three Tridents or more. Chapter
thirty-one below is dedicated to an exposition of the Trika Maṇḍala, its varieties
according to selected Trika scriptures and how they should be drawn. We will come
across this maṇḍala repeatedly, especially in the second half of the Tantrāloka, that is,
from chapter fifteen onwards, in which Abhinava expounds Trika rites. The maṇḍala is

the core of every Tantric system. As such, Abhinava refers to it right at the beginning in

his invocation of the Parā, the supreme Goddess of the Trika.
The highest reality is Anuttara — the Absolute, which is the pure Light of
consciousness alone (prakāśamātra), reverently identified with Bhairava. Its initial

manifestation, brimming over into cosmic manifestation, is the union of the oneness of

Anuttara with its divine power. Pouring out into manifestation impelled by the bliss of

TANTRĀLOKA

Parā is full (all-encompassing and perfect) (pūrṇā). Thus, even though
the universe (appears to be) separate (from Her), She protects it within Herself
as one (with Herself),® and She is most excellent because (as all things are one
with Her,) She is intent on nothing else (to sustain Her and the universe within
Her). (t is said in the Mālinīvijayottara that) ‘the power of the Suṣṭainer of the
Universe, said to be one with Him, (is the Goddess).”” In accord with that

teaching, She is ‘Bhairava’s Yoginī’. As She is never separate from the
supreme subject, She is of that nature (and She is His own nature)
(tadātmabhūtā). Thus ‘it is She who assumes the form of His will when He

wishes to emit (the universe).' According to this and similar statements (of
the wonder of the union of the Light and its universal power, which is its freedom

(svātantrya) and reflective awareness (vimarśa), it issues forth as the will which is its
primary energy of creation, to then develop into all of manifestation in the wonderful
variety (vicitratā) which is the beauty of its infinite being. This is the Trident Maṇḍala.
The three goddesses — Parā, Parāparā and Aparā —- identified with powers of will,
knowledge and action - sit on their Bhairavas in lotuses situated on the prongs of the
trident. Although Parā is one of the Goddesses of the Trika triad, She is also all three,

and they are aspects of Herself as the one power of consciousness manifest through and
as these three polarities. This oneness may be seen to be represented in some iconic
forms of Parā in which she is visualized as holding a trident (see Sanderson 1990: 39).

Ś’ Abhinava introduces right at the beginning of his work one of his most basic

hermeneutical tools, which he applies consistently at practically every possible occasion

throughout his exposition of the teachings of all the schools that he integrates into his
profound vunderstanding of Trika. This is the doctrine of Supreme Nonduality
(paramadvaya) of the one reality, that is, Anuttara Śiva (i.e., Bhairava) consciousness,
the hallmark of which is its all-embracing plenitude, in which every part is the whole.

This one reality which is consciousness is understood as an ongoing process of
perception through which all things are made manifest, subsist, and fall away, at one in

the Inexplicable eternal state of consciousness, which is neither process nor its absence,
both and neither together. This is achieved by including within it the four aspects of

perception (pramāṇa) — subject, means, object of knowledge and knowledge itself.
These are as defined in the phenomenology of the Mīmāṁṣā and the empiricism of the
Nyāya, and here understood to be the energies of the one consciousness. They are
defined right at the beginning of the Nyāyabhāṣya (1/1/1) as follows:
‘there (in that
context) the active modality (of being) (pravṛtti) of one who is engaged in the desire to
take up or abandon (an object) is the subject (pramātr). The means by which he attains

his object (artha) is the means of knowledge. The entity (artha) which is known

(pramīyate) is the object of knowledge. The knowledge of (that) object is the right

knowledge (pramiti) (gained thereby). In this way, the essential nature of reality
(arthatattva) is exhausted in (these) four types.”

In Abhinava’s exegeses of the Trika triad, the first three are the three
Goddesses. Parā is the subject; Parāparā is the means of knowledge and Aparā is the

object. “Right knowledge’ is Parā as all three. As such she is the power of Bhairava,

Who is the one consciousness which is the Supreme Subject who in relation to the
‘contracted’ and ‘limited’ individual perceiver is ‘uncontracted’ and ‘unlimited’, that is,
‘full’, all-embracing and perfect.

” Read with MSs K, Kh, Ch, J, Jh, and T abhedatayā for abhedarīpatayā.
’ MV 3/5ab.

' MV 3/šcd. Read devī for devi. Jayaratha is quoting a passage from the

Maālinīvījayottara in which is described the progressive development of the three main
transformations of Śiva’s power into the powers of will, knowledge and action. Doing


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


the scriptures), She is consciousness and ‘the creative intuitionʼ, that is,
wisdom (prajñā) (which is intuitive insight into the true nature of reality). As
the initial upsurge (ucchalattā) (of absolute consciousness towards emanation),

She is (Śiva’s) desire to pour forth externally. Thus She is ‘the Goddess’. As

She is the abode of repose of the perceiver also, She shines as right knowledge
(pramiti).. Thus, although they are external, subject, means and object of
knowledge are ‘the aspects (of perception)ʼ, that is, the parts which are forms

(of the consciousness) of the individual soul (in the form of rays) of the
‘(Trika) Trident."
so, Jayaratha explains how the one power assumes the form of the Trika triad of the

goddesses Parā (the will), Parāparā (the power of knowledge) and Aparā (the power of
action). Jayaratha quotes from this passage in relation to all three goddesses. The whole
passage (i.e., MV 3/5.9) is quoted below in TĀv ad 1/67cd (68cd), where MV

3/5ab-6ab, 8cd-9ab are quoted. MV 3/5ab and 3/9cd are quoted in TĀv ad 11/72-73ab.
The entire passage is quoted by Rājānaka Rāma in SpKāvi. p.148 and Bhagavadutpala

in SpPra ad 1/1. Mālinī and Mātṛkā, both primary alphabet Goddesses, are clearly

identified with Parā, who is ‘made of all the letters’ (below 15/333d) and elsewhere
(for
example, below, 3/233-234, also introductory comment to 15/333).

' When consciousness directs its attention towards self-presentation in its cosmic form,
this is its empowered state, and Śiva becomes Śakti. This state of propensity is the

primordial, original form of Spanda. Bhagavadutpala (ibid.) defines Spanda accordingl
y
as: 'the consciousness, free of thought constructs, that is the operational state of

propensity (to manifestation) simultaneously directed everywhere of the Supreme Soul

who is himself motionless.” The pulse of consciousness is its power in the first moment
of creation (SpNir p. 54). This, the first moment (prathamā tuṭiḥ) of perception, is
the

state of consciousness when it is intent on or directed towards the sphere of objectivity

but has as yet not poured out of itself, and contains all its energies that are about to be
emitted held together in a potential state within itself (cf. ŚDr 1/8-1 1ab). It is like a sheet
of still water that has been agitated and is just about to heave out of itself, or the
first

tension felt when about to clench a fist (ŚDṛ 1/13cd-15 and SpKāvi, p. 55), or again, like

the seed that has swollen about to sprout. This ‘subtle swelling° (kinciducchūnatā) (ibid.
p. 80) is the seed state of all phenomena, and is the bliss of consciousness as
the
awareness it has that ‘I am everything’ (ibid. p.85). To lay hold of this initial moment
of

intent s to lay hold of the pulsation of consciousness. It is to grasp the subject just in the

moment of his intent to perceive, when consciousness is not yet restricted to
any
specific object, but pure and free of thought constructs, is in a state of expansion
(unmeṣa). To fix one’s attention firmly on this intent is yoga in the sense of union
between the limited individual soul and its own authentic nature within itself by virtue

of its fullness (ibid. p. 93). In Trika terms, this state of pure will or intention (icchā) is
the Goddess Parā.
Pramātr is the perceiving subject. Pramāṇa is the means of knowledge by which he
perceives, namely, the senses and mind along with the scriptures, the teacher’s words
and sound reasoning (sattarka) based on insight. Prameya is the object of knowledge.

Pramiti is the noetic perception - the ‘right knowledge’ that results from the interaction

of these three aspects of the act of perception. In this way, Parā is both the initial and
final moment of perception. Thus She is ‘full’ (pūrṇā) and all-embracing. She is the

pure empowered state of the universal pulsation of consciousness that encompasses
every phase of its activity within itself without being divided thereby.

Read MS5 K, Ch, J, Jh, Ñ Ṭ aṇḍ Ḍ aṇurāpā for arārāpā.

Śiva is worshipped seated on a seat or throne (āsana). The worshipper should think

that this throne consists of the thirty-ṣix principles (tattva). In the course of Trika ritual,

TANTRĀLOKA

(Parā) has ‘ʻmade (Her) place’ there, that is, where the Transmental

Lotuses (are located), manifesting as beyond them. ‘I bow’ (to Her), that is, I
enter into Her essential (pure conscious) nature by rendering naught the (lower,
contracted) subjectivity (projected onto) the body and vital breath etc. This is
the meaning.
Once the nature of Parā has been declared in this way, without defining
Aparā’s nature, it is not possible to talk about Parāparā’s nature,'“ which
consists of both of them (Parā and Aparā), and so, omitting the goddess
Parāparā (although her) turn has come, (He) thus turns (our attention) to the
goddess Aparā.

|ṭEPVPEE EIĒJṬGzVIETAḺEI-ṬṬṈEHI
naumi devīṁ śarīrasthāṁ nṛtyato bhairavākṛteḥ |

they are projected into the vital breath and assimilated to various parts of the Trident,
which is the core of the Trika maṇḍala (see below, 15/295cd-312), projected along the
axis of the body. According to Abhinavagupta, Trika excels other schools because the

thrones they describe reach only certain principles (TĀ 15/319-320), whereas that of the
Trika extends up to the Transmental (unmanā) beyond Sadāśiva (concerning the throne

see SŚP 3/47-56 and the notes; also, SVT 2/55cd ff.). We are especially concerned here

with the three prongs of the Trident. They issue out of the navel of SŚadāśiva who lies
supine, gazing upwards into the Cavity of Brahmā at the top of the head. Abhinava
explains below:
‘One should recollect the three rays that have risen up from (Sadāśiva’s) navel.

At the end of the End of Sound, they are Power (śakti), the Pervasive One (vyāpinī) and
the Equal One (samanā). Resplendent, the three have emerged from within the cavity of
the head (and extend) up to the End of the Twelve. There also, (on top of) them, are the
three (pure) white lotuses of the Transmental. This is the Throne consisting of thirty-

seven principles. (TĀ 15/313-314).
Ascending along the Trident, duality diminishes step by step until one reaches
the Transmental, which is the level of oneness free of all differentiation (TĀ 15/342343ab). In accord with the Trika doctrine of ‘triadic onenessʼ, the Transmental consists

of three lotuses. These blooming lotuses are the seats of the three goddesses of the Trika

— Parā in the centre, Aparā to her left, and Parāparā to her right, along with their
consorts on which they sit, namely, Bhairavasadbhāva, Navātmabhairava and

Ratiśekhara, respectively. Abhinava explains:


‘It is said (in MV 8/96ab) that the three prongs are Power, the Pervasive and
the Equal One. There also, (above) is the supreme abode (paramadhāman) of the plane
of the Upper (ūrdhva) Kuṇḍalinī, pertaining to the Transmental and described as being
of the form of three lotuses. ‘This is the supreme throne’ (ibid. 8/70cd) because it
reaches up to Parā. The goddesses abide above it. (PTv p. 129) See Gnoli 1985: 219-

220 and Sanderson 1986: 178 ff. and ibid. 187 for a drawing of the Trident that is
visualized in the body. Concerning Power, the Pervasive One and the Equal One and the
other stages of Sound, see Appendix to Chapter One.

Read yatra yāni for tatra yāni.

6 RṞead parāparāsvarūpasya for parāparasvarūpasya.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Ibow to the goddess (Aparā), who resides in the body of Bhairava’s

dancing form and plays within it ike) a lightning flash in a sky (covered)
with dense storm clouds.
‘Bhairava’s formʼ is the Supreme Self, whose nature is full (and all-

embracing) (and is said to be) ‘dancing’, according to the view of the Śivasūtra

(which declares that): ‘the Self is the dancer.”" (He dances) as he manifests the
unfolding of each wonderfully diverse role (bhūmikā)' (he assumes), which

has as its root (cause) the obstruction (freely imposed) on his own hidden (true

and) eṣsential nature.
that):

(The goddess Aparā) ‘resides in the bodyʼ of (Bhairava). (It is said

Read, as does Jayaratha, bhairavākṛteḥ for bhairavākṛte.

“ Aparā, the third Trika goddess, govemns the lower level of duality and objectivity.

She is the energy of Bhairava, Whose body is dark with the duality of Māyā. Aparā
shines within it as the Light of divine consciousness that flashes here and there within
duality and objectivity for an instant at any time, any place. Swami Lakshmaṇjoo

explains that Aparā ‘is the light that comes from the objective world in the form of God
consciousness.”

We may observe in passing that Bhairava, the frightening, fierce aspect of Śiva

(the Benign) is here represented as a storm god, exactly as is Rudra, his Vedic

predecessor. As Chakravati (1986: 2) notes: ‘In a passage of the Ṛgveda [Rudra] is
identified with Agni [Fire] who has his abode in the sky as the sun, in the atmosphere as
lightning and on the earth as fire. The crackling flames of the fire as the unbridled fury
of the raging storm, its roaring, its tearing up of heaven and earth. The dark masses of
clouds, pierced only by the quivering gleams of lightning and thunderbolt, must have

produced a strong overpowering impact upon the minds of the Aryans of India or the
Vedic bards who saw Rudra as the cause of all these shuddering and fearful phenomena
and naturally connected everything terrible and horrible with him.’

ŚSu 3/9./Aparā operates on the plane of immanence within the body, senses, mind
and the outer world. By quoting this Śivasūtra, Jayaratha implies that Aparā is the

energy of Bhairava when He is present on the embodied plane of existence as the Self of

every living being. Bhāskara comments on this sātra saying: ‘the experienced dancer,

who knows about (the forms) of sentiment (rasa), emotive states (bhāva) and acting,

and who possesses the correct state of mind (sattva), speech, physical appearance and

dress, is said to act his part well. Similarly, the Self manifests itself in accord with its

own inherent nature everywhere (as every living being) by penetrating into the
sentiment (rasa) of each emotive state (bhāva it expresses) and playfully behaving

accordingly. (Thus, the Self) is said to be the dancer because it assumes every state of
being. Inebriated with the juice of supreme bliss, (the Self sports) in this way in the
world of daily life (vihṛti) . . . (and) assumes the role of the limited subject . . . He is

transported to the plane (of being) in which he savours (the joy of the beauty of
consciousness) and so acts out the cosmic drama through the activity of the senses,

desiring neither to gain some desired object, nor to avoid the undesirable. Thus, he
delights everywhere with the light of his own nature, his mind filled with contentment
by the power of his ever-persisting (avilupta) consciousness.” See Dyczkowski 1992b:

113 ff.

'! Read with MSs K, Kh, Ch, J, Jh, Ñ T and D tattadvaicitryabhūmikā- for
tattadviśvavaicitryabhūmikā-.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘When assuming a state of intent towards Her task of the form — ‘may
all this be such’ and at that very instant making it so, She is called activity here
(in this world).”!
According to such teachings, (Aparā, who is the power of action,) is

present in (Bhairava’s) essential nature as (the power) that brings about the
wonderful diversity of the endless manifestations of each perceiver and object
of perception etc. Thus ‘I bow to the Goddess’ Aparā who plays (the game) of
pouring out (ullāsana)'' the universe (from absolute consciousness). This is the
(prose) connection (between the words of this verse). Thus, although external

and manifesting as the nature of all things, (it is said that):

‘(Bhairava) is black and bears the form of darkness because He destroys
all things and consumes the aspect of (His own) luminous energy (tejas)
pertaining to Māyā that generates duality.”
(Aparā) rests within the supreme subject, whose nature is described in

this and other such (verses,) and so her form is black and brown. This is said
''MV 3/7.
'' The root las denotes ‘embracing and ‘play° (śleṣaṇakrīḍdanayoḥ). The noun ‘ullāsa
formed with the prefix ‘ur’ means, according to Monier-Williams: light, splendour, the

coming forth, becoming visible, appearing, joy, happiness, merriness, increase, and
growth. In a technical sense here, it denotes the exuberance of consciousness that pours

out into manifestation. The later Kaula Tantras, of which the earliest is the

Kulārṇavatantra, stress that it denotes a kind of exuberant sexual passion. See there,
chapter eight, where levels and degrees of this passionate exuberance - ullāsa — are

classified.
'' According to the Siddhayogīśvarīmata, which is the first and root Trika Tantra, the

three Goddesses correspond to the three qualities (guṇa) of Nature (prakṛti), and their
colours accord with that. Thus, Parā is sattva, which is white. Parāparā is rajas, which is
red. Aparā is tamas, which is tawny black (see Dyczkowski 2009, vol. 2, p. 132 ff.). We
may note in passing that the identification of the Goddess with Nature (prakṛti), which
we find already in the pre-tantric Devīmāhātmya, is common in the Tantras of the later
period after Abhinavagupta. It appears in the earliest Tantras, for example the

Niśvāsatattvasaṁhitā, and then is quietly dropped. It is resumed in the Tantras at the
end of the early period, such as those of the Kubjikā corpus, and continues to be a
standard identification in the later Tantras, as it is generally in the Purāṇas, such as the

Devībhagavatam. Abhinava sets aside these identifications, preferring to understand the

Triad as energies of consciousness or aspects of the cognitive process. In this
perspective, Aparā’s dark colour is symbolic of Her state of rest within the supreme

perceiver. Thus, unmanifest, She is like darkness in which nothing can be seen.
Analogously, as the radiant light of the intuitive and creative imagination of

consciousness (citpratibhā), Parā is white. According to the SYM, the visualized form
of Aparā is the same as that of Parāparā. The difference is that Aparā is ‘tawny blackʼ
(kṛṣṇapiṅgalā). This characteristic is again specified in the MV 8/73d, which is echoed

below in 15/324cd-325. 15/323cd-325 are a paraphrase of MV 8/72-73, where the three
goddesses are briefly described.
Descriptions of the three goddesses are rare. No other ones have been traced in

the surviving Trika sources. Forms of Parā appear in many traditions. These have been
explored by Sanderson. Important, little studied sources are the Kubjikā Tantras, which


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


are very closely related to the Trika Tantras that precede them. There the three
goddesses, as in Trika teachings, are seen as a stable triad and worshipped together.
Thus the Śrīmatottara declares: ‘The goddess is Parā, Aparā as well as Parāparā’ (parā
caivāparā devī tathaiva ca parāparā) (ibid. 4/39cd). In the Kubjikā Tantras they are
worshipped on the corners of a triangle representing the Yoni, instead of on the prongs

of the Trika Trident. This is an accepted option in the Trika sources also, to which
Abhinava
refers.
Thus,
he
writes
(in
PTv
p.
54):

abhedamāhātmyatirohitatatpramātrādikoṇatrayatvāt mahāguhā iti ucyate saiva ca
vastutaḥ pūjãdhãma triśūlaṁ trikãrthe | `It is said to be the Great Yoni (mahāguhya)
because (it consists) of the (three) corners of subject (object and means of knowledge
when) the greatness of oneness has been obscured. In reality it is the abode of worship
which, according to the Trika school (trikārtha), is the Trident.”
The Kubjikā sources sometimes depict tridents at the corners of this triangle, in

which the triadic goddess is worshipped, maintaining in this way the original association

with the Trika Trident. In the Śrīmatottara (published as the Gorakṣasaṁhitā) we find

the following descriptions of the three.
The Visualized form of Parā

cakramadhye tu sañcintyā śuklāmbaradharāṁ parām || 159 |
pustakavyagrahastāṁ ca jñānamudrādharāṁ tathā |

sphāṭikenākṣasūtreṇa sarvābharaṇabhūṣitām || 160 ||

sragdāmālambitagalāṁ prabhāmaṇḍalamaṇḍitām |
dvibāhumekavadanāṁ candrakoṭiṣamaprabhām || 161 1|

udgirantī mahaughena śāstrakoṭī anekadhā |

evaṁ dhyānasamāviṣṭaḥ sākṣād vāgīśvaro bhavet || 162 ||
saṅskṛtaṁ prākṛtaṁ caiva vedasiddhāntagahvaram |
granthataś cārthataś caiva udgiren nātra saṁśayaḥ || 163 |
pīthamadhyagatābhyāsāt pīṭhadvāre ‘thavā priye |

‘The (goddess) Parā should be thought to be in the centre of the Wheel. She
wears white clothes, holds a book and makes the gesture of knowledge along with a

rosary of crystal. She is adorned with all the ornaments. A garland of flowers hangs
from her neck and is she is adorned with a halo of light. She has two arms and one face

that shines like millions of moons. She utters repeatedly, in a great flow, countless
scriptures (śāstra). (159cd-162ab)

He who is immersed in this visualization in this way becomes the Lord of

Speech himself. He who is in a sacred seat or at the door of one, O dear one, by
practicing (this) speaks in Sanskrit and Prakrit about the deep (teaching of) the Veda and
Siddhānta both (literally) from the book and the sense (of the teachings).” (Śrīmatottara
8/159cd-164ab)
The Visualized Form of Parāparā
śṛṅgātapuramadhye tu dhyāyed devīṁ parāparām |

udayārkaprabhāṁ dīptāṁ dāḍimīkuṣumopamām || 1 13 ||
raktavastraparidhānāṁ jaṭājūtendubhūṣitām |

trivalītaraṅgamadhyasthāṁ romarājivibhūṣitām || 1 14 |
sarvalakṣaṇasaṅpiūrṇāṁ pīnonnatapayodharām |

caturbhujām ekavaktrāṁ trinetrāṁ ca śivāṁ parām || 1 15 II
pāśāṅkuśadharāṁ divyāṁ varadāṁ cābhayapradām |
rovaddáhāṁ varṇahārāvalambiṇīm || 116 ||

TANTRĀLOKA

sarvāvayavaśobhāḍhyāṁ sarvābharaṇabhāṣitām |
mudrāpaīñcakasaṁyuktāṁ pīṭhatrayasamanviām || 1 7 ||
evaṁ dhyātvā mahādevīḥ brahmarandhrasya madhyagām |
‘(The adept) should meditate on the goddess Parāparā in the middle of the

triangle. She shines with the light of the rising sun and is (red) like a pomegranate
flower. She wears red clothes and is adorned with the moon in (her) matted hair. She has
three folds like waves in the middle (of her belly) adorned with lines of (fine) bodily
hair. Full of all the (auspicious) characteristics, (She is beautiful) with fat upraised

breasts. She has four arms and one face with three eyes. She is Supreme Śivā. (113-115)

She holds a noose and a goad and, divine, she makes gestures bestowing boons

and fearlessness. Tranquil, she is supreme (para). A garland of wildflowers is tied round
her head, and she holds a necklace of letters. She is beautiful in all her limbs and is

adomed with all the omaments. She possesses the Five Insignia (of a Kāpālikā) and the
three sacred seats. The goddess is visualized in this way in the middle of the Cavity
Brahmā. (ibid. 8/112cd-1 18ab)

The Visualized Form of Aparā

saḍānanāparā devī nīlajīmātasaṁnibhā l| 159 ||

bhujadvādaśakopetā nāgābharaṇamaṇḍitā |

kirītakuṇḍalair yuktā nāgayajñopavītinī |I 160 |I
triśūlaṁ kartarī khaḍgaṁ nāgaṁ śaktiś ca darpaṇam |
dakṣiṇaiśca karair devyā dīptakālānalaprabham || 161 |I
khaṭvāṁgaṁ pāśam abhayaṁ mudrādaṇḍakamaṇḍalum |
vāmapārśve varārohe astraṁ kālānalaprabham || 162 |
viśvamadhyagatā devī viśvaṁ vyāpya vyavasthitā |
jvālāmālākulāṁ dhyātvā dīpyamānāṁ mahaujasā || 163 ||
śrṛṁgātapuramadhyasthāṁ vaḍavānalamadhyagām |

‘The goddess Aparā has six faces and is (black) like a dark blue lightning

cloud. She has twelve arms and is adorned with snakes as ornaments. She has a tiara and
earrings and wears a sacred thread. The goddess holds with the right hands a trident, the

top of an arrow, a sword, a snake, a javelin and a mirror. O fair lady, on the left side
(she holds) an ascetic’s staff that shines like the inflamed fire of time, a noose, makes a
gesture of fearlessness, (holds) a staff, a water pot, and a weapon that shine like the fire

of time.

The goddess is in the middle of the universe and abides pervading the universe.
Having meditated on her as full of garlands of flames, shining with great energy, she is

in the middle of the triangle and the Mare’s Fire (vaḍavānala). (ibid. 22/159cd-164ab)
A form of Aparā is described elsewhere in the same source:
śnṁgātapuramadhyasthāṁ vidyātattve niveśitām || 200 ||

nīlajīmātavarṇābhāṁ nīlāṁjanasamaprabhām |

jatājūtadharāṁ divyāṁ kirīṭaramabhūṣitām || 201 II
ratnakuṇḍalasandīptāṁ trinetrāṁ mukuṭojjvalām |
Śaṁkhaśuktikamālābhiḥ kaṇṭhasthā ca virājate 202 |
hārakeyūraśobhāḍhyāṁ sarvalakṣaṇasaṁṅyutām |
bhujāṣṭakasamopetāṁ nānālaṁkāramaṇḍitām || 203 ||
kambu khaḍgaṁ tathā sūtraṁ bāṇaṁ dakṣiṇataḥ sthitāḥ |

pinākaṁ kheṭakaṁ kādyaṁ pāśaṁ vāme virājate l 204 1


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


(here with the words) ‘(She) plays within it like a lightning fiash in a sky

(covered) with dense storm clouds’.
Now he contemplates the goddess Parāparā whose nature consists of
both Parā and Aparā.

āzq |

ĪTTSĪTJI% TTTATRTATGRĪTTATTT |I/ |I
dīptajyotiśchaṭāpluṣṭabhedabandhatrayaṁ sphurat |
astrāḥ kālānalā dīptā lelihānāḥ suduḥsahāḥ |

nānālaṁkārasaṅyuktāṁ nānābharaṇabhūṣitām || 205 ||
yauvanasthāṁ madonmattāṁ pīṇavr̥tapayodharām |

madhyakṣāmāṁ nitaṁbāḍhyāṁ madirānandananditām || 206 |
mahākādyaiḥ kr̥tā mālā āpādatalalaṁbinī |

mahāpretāsanārūḍhāṁ amrṛtānandananditām || 207 ||
tarjayantīṁ mahāghorāṁ sarvalakṣaṇalakṣitām |
evaṁ parāparāṁ (> tv aparāṁ) dhyātvā śṛṛṁgātapuramadhyagām || 208 |I
vidyātattvasamāyuktāṁ ādhārapadasaṁsthitām |

dhyātvā ca pūjitāṁ devīṁ sarvakāmaprasādhanīm || 21/204cd-209 |

‘Located in the middle of the Triangle, she is placed within Vidyātattva. She is

like the colour of dark blue lightning with the lustre of blue collyrium, divine (and

beautiful), she has matted hair and is adorned with a tiara and jewels, she shines with

(her) jewel earrings, she has three eyes and (wears) a brilliant blazing crown, and is
beautiful with necklaces of conch shell and nacre around her neck. Rich with the beauty
of (her) pearl necklace and anklets, she possesses all the (auspicious) characteristics (of
deity). She has eight arms and is adorned with many ornaments. On the right (there are
in her hands) a (conch) shell (kambu), a sword, thread, and arrow. On the left a bow, a
shield, a skull, and a noose adorn (her). (21/200cd-204)
The weapons shine with the fire of time; licking up (and destroying with their
flames), they are extremely hard to bear. She possesses many ornaments and is adorned
with many adornments. She is in her youth and is mad with passion, her breasts fat and

round. She is thin in the middle (at Her waist) and is endowed with (beautiful) hips. A

garland of skulls has been made (for her) that extends to (her) feet. She is mounted on
the Great Ghost (mahāpreta), and is made blissful with the bliss of nectar. She waves

her index finger, and is very fierce, characterized by all the (auspicious) characteristics.
Having worshipped Aparā, who is in the middle of the Triangle, in this way,

linked to Vidyātattva and residing on the plane of the Foundation, and having
worshipped the goddess, she fulfils all (one’s) desires. (Ibid. 21/204cd-209)

All the manuscripts read 21/208c as evaṁ parāparāṁ dhyātvā ‘having
meditated in this way on Parāparā.’ But this cannot be correct. Parāparā is red. Here this
goddess is clearly said to be ‘black like a lightning cloud’, which is the same analogy
Abhinava makes, drawing quite probably from some scriptural source. Thus, he glosses
the original description beautifully, saying that the darkness of the cloud is Bhairava’s
body, whereas she is the lightning-like energy that flashes within it. Moreover, we are
told that this goddess resides on the lower plane of the foundation, which would be

appropriate for Aparā. Again, she is associated with Vidyātattva. This is the lowest of

the three tattvas comprising Vidyā, Ātma and Śiva. Clearly all these are indications that
confirm that the goddess described here is Aparā, not Parāparā.

TANTRĀLOKA

stāj jñānaśūlaṁ satpakṣavipakṣotkartanakṣamam |)| 4 ||

May (Parāparā), the pulsingly radiant (sphurat) prong of
knowledge," that has burnt up the triple fetter with its blazing rays of the

light (of Śiva consciousness), have the power to uproot all that runs

contrary (vipakṣa) to the truth (satpakṣa).

‘Kmowledge’ (is defined according to the Mālinīvijayottara as follows):
‘The power of knowledge is said to make known here in this world
what is well determined, namely that: “this thing is such and not otherwise”.”'
The essential nature of the power of knowledge mentioned (here and)
elsewhere, is also inwardly threaded through with (the powers of) will and

action, and so (it is rightly) called Parāparā. It follows that, according to the
teaching stated further ahead, namely that ‘thus that Trident is the (dynamic)

fusion of the triad of energiesʼ,'' that (prong is itself) the Trident. It burns the

triple impurity, namely Āṇava, (Māyīya and Karma), the nature of which will be

explained further ahead."" (The one triple impurity is) the fetter (that binds the

individual soul) because, grounded as it is in duality, it is the cause of bondage.
(The prong of the power of knowledge burns them up) with the ‘blazing’, that

is, unobstructed, activity of each of the senses (which are its) ‘rays of light’, in

accord with the following view:

‘The All-pervasive Lord (vibhu) Himself, blossoms forth wherever the
rays (of the senses) unite (within consciousness when making contact with their

objects).

'! Apar sits on the prong of action, Parā on the prong of the will and Parāparā on the

prong of knowledge of the Trika Trident. Parā is always in the centre (15/334cd-335ab).
She is white. Parāparā is red and is generally on the right prong. Aparā is black and

generally on the left, but she may also exchange places with Parāparā (see below,
15/323cd-325).

'! Swami Lakshmaṇjoo translates: ‘The 7riśūla [Trident] of Śiva is filled with will,

knowledge and action, but it is predominantly Jāāna [knowledge]. Let that destroy the
opposite of Jagadānanda [Cosmic Bliss]. Let that Jīānaśula [the Prong of Knowledge]
destroy all three bondages by its flame of Divine God Consciousness.’ All this must be
‘uprooted', that is, transcended by the expansion of fullness.

'“ MV 3/7.

'!T Each one of the three powers inwardly contains the other two. The three prongs fuse

together in such a way that each one is of the nature of all three whilst retaining their
specific nature. See below, 3/108cd (108ab).

'! These are the three forms of Impurity (mala) that bind the individual soul, namely, 1)

Āṇava, that pertains directly to the soul (aṇu) as its fundamental ignorance and sense of

incompleteness (apūrṇamanyatā), 2) Māyīya — the sense of duality; and 3) Karma,
which is the soul’s binding activity when subject to the other two Impurities. See below,
1/22 ff. comm. and notes, also 9/60 ff.

'" This line is also quoted below ad 4/257cd-258ab. The complete verse is quoted by

Amṛtānanda in his commentary called Dīpikā on the Yoginīḥr̥daya (p. 185), but he does
not tell us its source. He introduces it declaring that it is said by those who are ‘intent on
union with the yoginī'. The whole verse says: ‘The All-pervasive Lord (vibhu) Himself

blossoms forth wherever the rays (of the senses) unite. For those who possess that same


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Thus, it is ‘pulsingly radiant’. It is one with pure consciousness, and so
(the Trident of Energies) is the essence of (its pulsingly) radiant effulgence

(sphuraṇa). Thus ‘may it have the power’, that is, capacity to ‘uproot’ and

destroy by its nature as full (and perfect) insight (pārṇaprathā) ‘all that runs
contrary to the truth (satpakṣa). (The truth) is the (correct, fully) existent
aspect (pakṣa) (of the range of manifestation as the Six Blisses), namely,
Cosmic Bliss (iagadānanda). (Those aspects that) ‘run contrary’ (to it) are the
absence of the Blisses and (the other levels of) Bliss beginning with Innate Bliss
(nijānanada), which are (all essentially degrees) of absence of the experience

(prathā) of that (Cosmic Bliss).' That is said (in the very first verse of the

Mālinīvijayottaratantra);

Being and who do not (need to) take the support of rules and regulations (niyama), (all)
talk of meditation and (outer) worship is a deceit.’ He goes on to explain that ‘the
yoginīs are (forms of) consciousness as subject, means and object of knowledge. Their
union is (their) repose in the supreme perceiver brought about by (their) introverted
state. Or else (it can be understood to mean) union together equally in the one wheel of
energies in order to worship the group of eight (Mothers), Brāhmī and the rest. This is
the union of the yoginīs.’ (ibid.)
When the activity of the senses and mind (i.e., their ‘rays’) converge to
perceive (= ‘illumine’) anything, they all come together converging in the unity of

consciousness

which, through the resultant perception, is itself the knowledge of what

they perceive. Cf. ŚSū 38: ‘Waking is the second ray (of consciousness). Kṣemarāja
explains that this aphorism describes the state of the yogi who attains Innate Knowledge
(sahajavidyā), which is the inherent attribute of his own conscious nature. The object-

centred perceptions of the waking state no longer militate against the pure subjective
awareness of contemplative absorption. The yogi is active in the world and continues to
be aware of himself as the perceiver, contrasted with the object perceived, but grasping
the fullness of his universal ‘’ consciousness, he realises that it is the source from
which objectivity emanates. He alone of all people is truly awake, and so recognises that
everything is an extension of his own nature, a second ray of light from the source of
which he is the first ray. Thus, whatever he perceives through the senses makes the
universal consciousness of Śiva apparent to him, and he realises that he and it are two

aspects of the same reality. In this way, the rays of the senses converge within
consciousness, and the ‘All Pervasive Lord blossoms forth’.

' The one reality is said to be both ‘light’ (prakāśa) and ‘eṭfulgence’ (sphurattā). The

first is a masculine word and the latter feminine, and so implicitly correspond to Śiva
and Śakti. The Light shines both as the pure transcendental Light of eternal Śiva
consciousness and as all things that appear in any form or way. In the first case, its
power to be all things is hidden within It as a potential; in the latter, it is active and

apparent in its effects. This ‘wonderful diversity is the ‘effulgence’ of the Light. It is
the manifestation of the power of the freedom of the Light to be all things. Moreover, as
this takes place through and as the reflective awareness the Light has of its own nature,

both transcendental and immanent as all things, this too is its ‘effulgence’. In short,

‘effulgence’, ‘freedom’ and ‘reflective awareness’ are the same Śakti, viewed in three

different perspectives.

' The six levels of Bliss correspond to the emptiness of deep sleep, from which the

vital breath arises, and the five forms of the vital breath in their universal, cosmic state.

A note to the printed text explains: ‘Going from Emptiness (sśunya) to the level of the
Pervasive breath (vyāna), there are six planes of Bliss. They are 1) Nijānanda — Innate
Bliss, the nature of which is rest (in the emptiness of deep sleep), 2) Nirānanda —
Absence of Bliss, 3) Parānanda — Supreme Bliss, 4) Brahmānanda — the Bliss of the

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The rays of the Moon of Knowledge that have come forth from the
Supreme Lord’s mouth and have the power to destroy (all that) runs contrary

(vipakṣa) to Cosmic Bliss (iagadānanda) triumph!”

says:

Now in order to contemplate the lower (apara) (form of) Trika also, he

aIṬ-ŪTIĪTF: JīTRTTJAT

T̄TÑ TPTSJ
TT. I|| 4 1 |
svātantryaśaktiḥ kramasaṁsisṛkṣā
kramātmatā ceti vibhor vibhūtiḥ |
tad eva devītrayam antarāstām
anuttaraṁ me prathayat prakāśam || 5 ||
May that same triad of Goddesses — who are the glorious power of
the All-pervading Lord (vibhu) as 1) the power which is (His) freedom, 2)

the intent to emit the succession (krama) (of manifestation), and 3) the
succession (krama) itself — inwardly reveal my own (unsurpassable)

Anuttara nature (svabhāva).

Brahman, 5) Mahānanda — the Great Bliss, and 6) Cidānanda — the Bliss of

Consciousness.” See below 5/44-52ab, where the six Blisses are described in detail.

' Jayaratha observes that the last sentence of this verse is drawn from the invocatory

verse with which the Malinīvijayottara begins. It is the object of Abhinava’s

commentary, the Mālinīvijayavārttika, where he explains that the ‘knowledge’ meant
here is the reflective awareness (vimarśa) of transcendental Śiva consciousness, both as

the moonlight of the pure Being of phenomenal manifestation and that manifestation
itṣelf, as the rays of its light. He writes: ‘The great knowledge is the pervading glory

(vaibhava) of the mass of the moon’s (tad) rays that has arisen initially (prāk) (before
all else) from the unconditioned essential being (sadbhāva), which is nothing but
oneness with Being (bhāva)
such (tādṛk), it is spread (tatam) (throughout the
universe), free (from all that is) to be accepted or rejected, and (created) by its own
(power) of Māyā, it is diversified solely by (its condition) as the rays of the wonderful

variety of its expanding contemplation. This (knowledge), which is the Heart of the
Highest Lord, is (His) reflective awareness (ahhimarśa).’ MVV 1/15-17ab.

' MSs Kh, C, Ch and J read prakāśam for svarāūpam, agreeing with anuttaram.

Ānṇandabhaṭṭa quotes this verse in his commentary on the Vijñānabhairava ad
7ab. The reading in the printed edition of VBh is the same as found here. According to

Ānandabhatṭa, 1) svātantryaśaktir eva hi parā 2) saiva kramaṁ sraṣṭum icchantī aparā

3) saiva ca kramarūpā satī parāpareti kathitā | `1) Parā is just the power of freedom. 2)
That same (power) desirous of emitting succession is Aparā. 3) When that same (power)
is in the form of succession it is called Parāparā.”
Jayaratha equates these three differently. According to Jayaratha, these three

powers are equivalent to the Trika principle of Śiva, Śakti and Nara, respectively. They
correspond to 1) Śiva’s fredom which is oneness, 2) the will to emit the process of
manifestation, which is unity-in-difference, and 3) the world process itself, which is

duality. Abhinava invokes them s0 that they may abide within him and reveal to him his


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


The ‘power’ which is ‘freedom’ belongs to Lord Śiva, who possesses
an endless number of powers. ‘The intent to emit’ (all things) properly as
separate (from Śiva and one another) is the power of the Supreme Goddess,
which is (Śiva’s omnipotent) will (icchā) and the instrumental cause of the
emanation of the universe. (It is the will to emit) the ‘succession’, that is, the

creation (sarga) of the wonderful diversity of the universe of space and time in
accord with the tēāṣhing expressed (in the following verse from the
Īśvarapratyabh

‘The Lord makes manifest spatial succession through the wonderful
variety of forms (mārtivaicitrya), and so too temporal succession by the
manifestation of the wonderful variety of action (kriyāvaicitrya).”
own true unsurpassable nature - Anuttara — which is the pure Light of Śiva

consciousness. Lord Siva’s sovereignty is His freedom (svātantrya) manifest as these

three in this way. Anuttara remains eternally manifest even when particular, distinct
categories of existence come into being. Thisis because it is all of them at each level of
their emergent existence as their power to be such as they are. Here, Śakti is often

equated with Śiva’s sovereignty. It is like the regal power a king possesses by virtue of
which he is a king, the authority he exerts over his subjects, who depend on him for

their very existence. It is the Self of all things, and as such is Abhinava’s own Self, as it

is of everyone.
Abhinava begins his commentary (vivaraṇa) on the Parātriṁśikā (more
correctly called Parātrīśikā) with the same verse with which he begins the Tantrāloka,

which was written after it. There analogously he praises the Goddess Parā, as Anuttarā —
the Goddess Absolute, who manifests the Trika triad of Man, Śakti and Śiva:
‘I praise the Goddess Who, one, is my own consciousness, within whom this

universe manifests, shining as (if) external within emission and, once the disturbance (of
outer manifestation) is over, in the state of the (Goddess) Absolute (Anuttarā).
I praise Parā, the (supreme Goddess) Absolute (anuttarā) Who, a light unto

Herself (nijābhāsā), is the wonder of the intuitive imagination (pratibhācamatkṛti). May
She, once placedin the Heart (of my supreme consciousness), make manifest the triad
(trika) of Man, Śakti and Śiva.’ Concerning Anuttarā as the intuitive imagination in
cosmic terms, see below 3/65ab-65cd (3/65cd-66ab).

' One of the meanings of ‘Anuttara’ is that it is ‘an-’ ‘devoid of’ ‘-uttara’ ‘(anything)
superiorʼ, i.e., ‘unsurpassable’ or ‘most excellent’. The expression anuttaraṁ

svabhāvaṁ thus means ‘the own nature that is Anuttara’ and ‘the unsurpassable (or
‘most excellent’) own nature.” We read in the PTLV (p. 1-2): ʻYour nature (rūpa) (O
Lord) is Anuttara. It is superior (uttara), most excellent (utkṛsṣta), and above (all things).
And that with respect to (all that is) insentient, is the nature (rūpa) of the perceiver
(grāhaka). (The subject), which is consciousness and self-luminous, is not (perceived)
by another perceiver (that is superior to it). This is its condition as Anuttara (‘without

superior’). Thus Anuttara, which is consciousness, shines always and everywhere,
devoid of a ‘preceding’ and ‘subsequent’ space and time and cannot be denied (to
exist).

1P 2/1/5. Also quoted below ad 6/21-22ab, cf. below, 6/6 and comm. Abhinava

comments: “Thus, by means of the manifestation of the variety of external bodies such

as a house, courtyard, market, temple, garden and forest, each of which is different from
the rest, the spatial successions such as ‘distant’ and ‘near’, ‘wide’ and ‘narrow’ etc. are
made manifest by the Lord. But when, because of the strong recognition, which is the

experience, ‘this is essentially the same hand’ arises, and though there is no essential

TANTRĀLOKA

(Concerning the third member of the Triad, namely) ‘the process

(krama) itself , (the Īśvarapratyabhijñā declares that):

‘Succession (krama) is based on relative distinction (bheda), and
relative distinction too is (the result) of the existence or non-existence of (a

particular) manifestation.’'

According to this and similar teaching, (this is) the Nara state, which is
predominately based on duality (bheda), associated with (saṁbhinna) each of
the endless number of manifestations, and is the nature (rāpa) of the contracted
(individual) Self. In this way ‘the glorious powerʼ is this (triad) of Śiva, Śakti

and Nara,' which is (the regal majesty and) lordship ‘of the All-pervading
change in the body, yet formal differences appear, then the variety of forms, which
cannot co-exist in the same body, because the forms are contrary to one another, is
spoken of as action. (Śiva) makes temporal succession manifest through the

manifestation of the variety of forms, involved in action, limited or unlimited in their

nature as related to one another, that is, freely constructed in the imagination, because

the fruition etc. of action are related to it.’ (Translation by K.C. Pandey)

' TP 2/1/4ab. The following line says: ‘The existence or non-existence of

manifestations depends on the Lord, who is the one who determines their multiform
appearance. Utpaladeva’s own comment on this verse clearly identifies the cause of
temporal succession as Siva’s power of action: ‘The cause of succession in things is the
very action of the Lord, directed to the multiform appearance of the manifestations

differentiated in their nature and mutually exclusive.’ (Translation by Torella).

Abhinava adds: ‘here if time, which consists of a succession (of manifestations), be
simply difference in natural constitution, then the four fingers (of the hand) also, being

of different natural constitution, would constitute separate points of time. Therefore, the
essence of time is that succession, which is due to such differences, as is perceptible in
the presence of the red rays and absence of the bright mass of light (of the sun at

different times of the day) and of which the existence (of some) manifestations and the
non-existence (of others) is its very life . . . When (Śiva) manifests one season, for

example autumn, as totally different from the manifestation of another (season) such as
spring, and vice versa, then the succession of time arises. Thus, the power to bring about
this variety of manifestation, is the Lord’s power of ime (translation by K.C. Pandey).
' We have observed above in note 36 that Jayaratha understands Abhinava to be

referring in these first five verses to three Trika triads, supreme — triadic Anuttara,

middling - the three Goddesses, and inferior — this triad that he says consists of three
forms of Śiva as Śiva Himself, as His Śakti and as Nara, the individual soul. Swami

Lakshmanjoo (1995: 4) criticises Jayaratha’s interpretation as ‘contrary to the nature of
things'. He points out that this triad is clearly about Śiva’s ‘glorious power’ʼ. This is the

mass of Śiva’s energies. Jayaratha is addressing the problem of identifying the
intermediate power (parāparā) with the will — an identification that is normally made
with Parā. But this problem arises if one reads the text as he does and I, forced to do so
following him, have done. But Swami Lakshmanjoo proposes a different way of reading
the text that makes more sense. In his exposition of this verse, he explains that

svātantryaśaktiḥ is not an adjective of Śiva. It is an adjective of Parā. So, we should

understand these three to be equivalent not to the three Goddesses but as three aspects of

Parā. She herself is svātantryaśaktiḥ, the power of Śiva’s freedom. The remaining two
are aspects of Her, i.e., the intent to emit succession and the succession itself. In other

words, according to Swami Lakshmanjoo, these three energies are not Parā, Parāparā

and Aparā. They are three energies of just Parā alone. Perhaps the solution is that we


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Lordʼ, that is, of God who is the supreme (reality), the Absolute (anuttara) and

Light (of consciousness), as each one (of its) sparkling pulsations (sphuraṇa).

‘That same’ (lordship) is the ‘triad of Goddessesī whose nature is (such), as
explained before, because its essence is the unfolding (sphāra) of that

(lordship), and is ‘the Absolute (anuttara)’ because it is the Supreme Light.

‘My own nature’ is the unique (asādhāraṇa) nature of universal agency etc. (of

this fundamental consciousness). ‘May’ (the Triad of Goddesses) ‘reveal

inwardly° my own Self; may it manifest as the oneness (of reality), and may it
not obscure it even when the state of duality between each individual thing

(tattatbhedadaśā) arises. This is the meaning. After contemplating the deities

proper to one’s own school (darśana) in this way, that is, by entering into
have to pay attention to the context. Abhinava is concerned here not so much with the
energies themselves as with their relation to Anuttara as phases in the ‘processless
processʼ of its ‘actionless action’.

AIl that exists in any of the three spheres is the ‘radiant pulsation’ (sphuraṇa) in that
form of the dynamism of the Light of consciousness. Master of this process of
becoming, its ultimate source and final end, the very fact that consciousness manifests
in thīs way is its ‘lordshipʼ, that is, the freedom and mastery which makes it a living

Presence who is the Lord of all.
' The word ‘darśana’ literally means ‘the act of seeing or viewingʼ. Darśana in the

modern North Indian vernaculars also denotes the act of going to visit a deity in a temple or
a saintly person, just as one would say in English ‘going to see someone’. Thus, darśana,
which literally means ‘vision, insight, and seeing’, in this sense, is ‘a meeting with the
being who is seen and who seesʼ. Moreover, it has the added connotation in that context of

a spirtual ʻvision’ (see below, TĀv ad 272 and note). By extension, the word also means ‘a
philosophical system’, which in India, according to the nature of the system, may be
more or less theological, logical, systematic, theistic, atheist, related to a religious

tradition or independent. The word appears in the titles of compendia of such systems.

Well known examples are the Saddarśanasamuccaya (A Compendium of the Six
Philosophical Systems) by Haribhadra Sūri, the Śaddarśanasaṅgraha of Rajaśekhara, and
the Sarvadarśanasaṁgraha by Mādhava (see Halbfass 1988: 263 f. for a discussion of the
history of the usage of this word in this sense). In this respect, the word ‘darśana’ can
have a broad generic sense. The term Śaivadarśana (see KuKh 30/ 166ab) refers to all

the

schools

of

Āgamic

Śaivism

collectively,

as

does

the

expression

‘pārameśyaradarśana’ (the Supreme Lord’s teaching) (comm. TĀ 1/36.) It is also

regularly used to mean ‘Tantric or Kaula teaching’. Each one of the Kaula traditions
(āmnāya) is a darśana’. It denotes both the entire Tantric system and, as the rites and

yogic practices taught in any Tantric system imply, a view of reality; it also implicitly
denotes its theoretical, metaphysical basis. This is not an abstract insight into an
absolute principle — a transcendent vision that perceives the essence of things — it is a
perception of the orders and patterns of existing things related one to another in the
cosmic maṇḍala as its sacred components. It is more akin, therefore, to the ‘seeingʼ’ that
takes place when going to a temple, or, more appropriately in the Tantric context, the
‘seeing’ of the maṇḍala that takes place at the climax of initiation.
Again, the word ‘darśana’ denotes what could be called, broadly speaking, a

religion or religious tradition, and so entails the same problems of definition that we
encounter when trying to define what religion is in India in general. In this sense, darśana
denotes both a larger generic identity — what we call ‘religion’ — as well as a specific one,

what might be called a ‘cult’ with relation to a specific deity, or a ‘sect’. Thus, the religions,

Buddhism and Jainism, are referred to as darśanas (KuKh 68/50), just as schools of

Śaiviṣm are (ibid. 30/166ab.) The same term may also be used to denote a particular phase

TANTRĀLOKA

their essential nature, (Abhinavagupta) directs (our attention) simultaneously to

Gaṇeśa and Vaṭuka also.

jGUUGTEHEEEEḤ

TGhTTRTTTTTTTAT T |

šātaīr mīaf: razērqa-

THTTTFJGAT-HH āĪdāTeTT |/6. 11

taddevatāvibhavabhāvimahāmarīcicakreśvarāyitanijasthitir eka eva |
devīṣuto gaṇapatiḥ sphuradindukāntiḥ
samyak samucchalayatān mama saṁvidabdhim || 6 ||
One alone is the son of the Goddess (Parā). (He is) Gaṇapati (the

Lord of the deities of the senses), ' who shines with the beauty of the

of a religion as in the expression ‘vaidikadarśana’. Accordingly, the Buddhists, Jains,
Vedikas (bhaṭṭa), Sauras, Vaiṣṇavas and Śaivas constitute a group of six ‘darśanas’
(saḍidarśana), recalling the standard set of six philosophical systems (ṣaḍdarśana) (cf.

JY quoted in comm. on TĀ 29/73cd-75ab).

Kaulism as a whole is said to be a darśana. In the Netratantra, for example, we
find a chapter dedicated to ‘the vision of the Kula tradition’ (kulāmnāyanidarśana) (NT
12/1ab). The Kula Tantric systems are generally termed darśanas. Jayaratha, in his
commentary on the NSA of the Śrīvidyā tradition, refers to its teachings in this way at

least twice (at pp. 48 and 125; Padoux 1994: 28). The same term is used by Kashmiri
Śaiva authors to denote the schools of Kashmiri Śaivism. Thus, Rājānaka Rāma, who
comments on the Spandakārikā, uses the term ‘darśana’ to distinguish the teachings of
the Spanda school from those of other darśanas (SpKāvi, p. 39). Bhagavatotpala also
refers to the Spanda teachings as an independent (svatantra) ‘darśana’ (SpPra, p. 6).

However, in the case of the other schools of Kashmiri Śaivism, apart from the
Pratyabhijñā, which is constructed in a manner typical of Indian philosophical systems,

the application of the same term implies added resonances. Maheśvarānanda claims that

the Kashmiri Krama school is more excellent than all the currents (srotas) of the
teachings of the Śaiva scriptures because it is the essence of all the darśanas (MM p.

171-172). Similarly, Śitikaṇṭha in his Mahānāyaprakāśa (Light on the Great Teaching)

refers to the Krama system as one of several kuladarśanas (MP (1 Śk) p. 111. See also
Dyczkowski 1989: 75-77.) The term ‘kramadarśana’ is not uncommon (for example,

see the introductory remarks of the commentary to TĀ 3/256-257 and comm. on TĀ
4/173ab). Trika is referred to as a darśana several times in Kashmiri Śaiva sources. In

his commentary on the eighth aphorism of the Pratyabhijñāhṛdaya, for example,
Kṣemarāja says that Trikadarśana is the highest form of monism (paramādvaya).

Similarly, although Maheśvarānanda distinguishes between the Trika and Krama as two
darśanas, he maintains that because of their common monistic idealism, there is not
much difference between them (MM p. 92). In this case, by Trika is meant a
philosophical system. Jayaratha goes so far as to identify the teachers of the
Trikadarśana as those of the Pratyabhijñā, which is, in form and content, a typical
Indian philosophical system (comm. TĀ 4/172). See Dyczkowski 2009, vol. 2, p. 329 ff.

' Gaṇeśa, also called Vināyaka, is a deity who creates obstacles and difficulties if he is
not duly propitiated. But if he is, he removes them. Accordingly, he is commonly


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Moon. His own abiding state (nijasthiti) is to govern the Great Wheel of the

Rays (of the energies of Parā, Parāparā and Aparā) that exists by virtue
of the (unfolding and) glorious power (vibhava) of those deities. May he stir
(and lift) up the ocean of my consciousness thoroughly (to pervade the

universe and inspire me).

(Gaṇeśa is) ‘one aloneʼ, because He does not depend on any other
(being to do his work. Thus, he is the one) Lord who, without companion, as the

ego (directs) the ‘host’, that is, the wheel of the senses, in accord with the view:

‘Salutations to the one who, like the Sun, (of the ego) bears the office of

the Lord of the Host, that is, the intellect and other (senses).

invoked at the beginning of a treatise so that the author may be inspired by him and
successfully complete his work. Abhinava understands the deity to be much more than
simply a mythological figure or icon. Gaṇeśa is the Lord of the Host of Energies, that is,
the Lord of the Wheel of Energies (cakreśvara) of the body, senses, and mind. As such

he is the Sun of the ego which governs them. When we experience our grounding in
consciousness, the ego, that is, the sense we have of ourselves as individual agent and

perceiver, is realised to be that of universal consciousness. Gaṇeśa, the Lord of the

Wheel of Energies, is this consciousness, which is the universal and fundamental state

of the individual ego. The Goddess, three-fold, generates these and all the other
innumerable configurations of energies (śakticakra). They are Her unfolding radiance.
According to Jayaratha, this is Gaṇeśa’s solar nature as the Sun of the ego. Abhinava

associates him with the moon. According to Jayaratha, this is so when he is identified
with the downward, inhaled breath (apāna). Jayaratha couples him with his brother

Vaṭuka who, like Gaṇeśa, is also the son of the Goddess. Vaṭuka is the Sun of the
exhaled breath (prāṇa), whereas Gaṇeśa is the Moon of the lunar, inhaled breath
(apāna).

'" Swami Lakshmanjoo (1995: 4): in reality the task of all the senses, to grasp etc. their

objects is accomplished by the sovereignty of Śiva’s three powers, namely, Parā,

Parāparā and Aparā. This is the point of saying this.”

Swami Lakshmanjoo explains that innumerable assemblies of energies
(śakticakra) are created by the play of these three powers. Gaṇeśa governs them all and
s0, abiding within his own nature, he is the Lord of the Assembly — Cakreśvara. As such

he is a development of Parā.
' The Sun that symbolizes the ego is said to have twelve rays or forms, one for each

month of the year. They correspond to the twelve senses, namely: the intellect, mind,

five organs of action and five organs of perception. According to the Sāṁkhya, and

Śaivism in general, they develop from the ego and are govemed by it (see below
9/233 ff.). Sensory consciousness, empowered by its own vitalizing force, successively
and yet instantaneously goes through all the phases of its relationship with the perceiver.
This takes place initially seemingly externally, when consciousness operates as and
through the conditioned ego, which it relates to objectivity (idam) as a subject (aham).
Inwardly the subject (aham) abides alone as the one, unique and pure self-awareness of
unconditioned consciousness, independent of it; then, through the activity of the deified
senses, as the great rays of reflective awareness radiate from the Sun of subjectivity at
one (tanmayatayā) with their object. In this way the boundless ocean of the perceiverʼs
consciousness is stirred up by the expansion of consciousness the senses arouse.

Expanding, it dissolves away the impurity of the duality of objectivity, as each object of
sense is realised to be the power of transcendental awareness to take up any form, even

as it recognizes it to be nothing but itself. They are the inner and outer forms of the

TANTRĀLOKA

Thus ‘by virtue of the (unfolding and) glorious powerʼ, that is, by the

expansion (of consciousness) which is the Supreme Light of ‘those’ deities
mentioned in the previous (verses), the ‘great rays’ which are the deities of
each of the senses (that continuously) come into existence (bhavanasīla) by

(unfolding and) shining effulgently at one with them, in accord with the view
which will be expounded further ahead, namely that ‘what does not rest there

(i.e. in consciousness) is (as unreal) as a sky flower. Acting there like the

Lord of their Wheel, it is ‘his own abiding state (nijasthiti)’.. ‘May He stir
(and lift) up? ‘my’ own ‘consciousness’ which, because it is unfathomable, is
(like an) ‘ocean’; that is, may He make it expand and generate a state of oneness
with it (tadekamayatā) by means of the consciousness that has flown out from
each of the senses. (And may He do it) ‘thoroughly, that is, all around and in
every way, by destroying" the impurity of the objects of sense. This is the
meaning.
(He is) said to be ‘beautiful like the radiant moon’, as that accords
with (his power) to lift up the ocean (of consciousness) (as does the moon the
sea). In actual fact, what is indicated in this way is that He possesses the
pervasion (of the descending, inhaled lunar) breath (apāna) (that elevates

consciousness).

Again, He is ‘the son of the Goddess’. Vaṭuka is also such (that is, the
goddess’s son), but (Vaṭuka is black, whereas Gaṇeśa’s) body is white, and so
(He is said to be) ‘beautiful like the radiant moon’. The teachers indicate in

this way that (Gaṇeśa) possesses the pervasion (of the ascending, exhaled solar)
breath (prāṇa). As is proper (according to the) Kula scriptures, the epithet ‘son
of the Goddess’ refers to both (Vaṭuka and Gaṇeśa). That is said (there):
‘The son of the Goddess here is Vatuka, who is surrounded by his
energies.” Also: “Gaṇeśa, who removes obstacles, is the son of the Goddess . . .
(Now) surely it is (said) here in the scriptures and elsewhere that:

same thing. When reflectively realised as all things, ‘I’ consciousness (aham) unifies
consciousness into a state of plenitude that holds within itself all its manifestations

(ābhāsa) as their essential nature. Thus, although beyond time and space, it manifests
phenomenally as the ordered succession of moments and the harmonious juxtaposition

of spatial relationships of the aesthetically inspiring splendour of diversity.
' Below, 8/3cd, also quoted in TĀv ad 5/82cd-83ab (82), the full verse ad 6/21-22ab,
ad 7/62cd-63ab, 10/3-5, and 13/112cd-113ab.

' Read with MSs Ch, J, Jh, Ñ Ṭ and Ḍ -vilāpanena for vilāyanena.

' Jayaratha seems to have inherited an interpretation of this verse according to which it

refers to two of the Goddess’s children ~ Ganeśa and Vaṭuka (the child Bhairava). This

view is based solely on considering what is probably just an epithet of Gaṇeśa, ‘the son

of the goddessʼ, as a reference to Vaṭuka. Although Jayaratha agrees with this view, he
is aware, it seems, that it is somewhat strained, especially because Abhinava refers to
just one son of the goddess, as Swami Lakshmanjoo (1995: 4) also points out. So, he
defends it here by saying that the expression ‘son of the goddess’ refers to both. Gaṇeśa
is the consciousness that governs the senses. He presides over the inward moving breath
(apāna), which is consonant with the inward movement of sensory energies that feed the
perceiver, filling it with the outer objectivity made manifest by Vatuka, who presides
over the outward moving breath, which corresponds to the outward movement of the

energies of the senses.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘One should praise® (one’s own) current (of scripture) and the lineage

(of the teachers), as well as one’s own teacher. By failing to praise them one
would be (no better than) a thief.

In Praise of the Teachers
In accord with the view stated here and elsewhere, it is necessary indeed
for those who compose (such) treatises (sāstra) to praise their own teachers etc.
(It is said that):

‘Just as the stars in the sky do not shine when the sun is present, in the
same way in the presence of the Kulāgama the Siddhānta Tantras shine not.
Therefore, nothing apart from the Kula (teachings) can liberate from
transmigratory existence.”

Thus, even though (the teaching of) the treatise about to be expounded
is of two kinds, consisting as it does of (both the) Kula and the Tantric
modalities (of practice) (prakriyā), and because, as the above reference
Read saṁtānam for saṁkhyānam, and prakīrtayed for pravartayed.
'Y Concerning the development of the Kulāgama as a distinct category of scripture, see
Dyczkowski 1988: 59 ff.
'Ṁ Tantric practice, which for the most part is ritual in the Tantras but also yoga,

presents itself there in two modalities, called Tantric (tantrācāra, tantraprakriyā) and
Kaula (kulācāra, kulaprakriyā). Broadly speaking, the former is milder in relationship
to the latter. The deities tend to assume a gentle form. The offerings made to them are

vegetarian, and the cult is largely in the public domain, although formal entry into it

does require initiation. The main deities are mostly male, as are their attendants. The

Kaula, on the contrary, is ‘fierce’, energetic and secret.' The main deities generally
have fierce or ‘erotic’ forms, as do their attendants. Female forms are generally
dominant. The goddesses, fierce or ‘erotic’, major or minor, are yoginīs. These are of
many varieties and in huge numbers. Animal sacrifice and the offering of bodily

substances are the norm. The latter may include sexual fluids obtained through ritual
intercourse, although, as one would expect, these are usually represented by symbolic
substitutes. Entry into these cults, which in their basic form are secret, necessarily

requires an initiation which takes place by penetration (āveśa) of the deity into the
neophant, who is ‘pierced’ by its energy.
The Kaula modality is more similar in many respects to the ‘folk religionʼ of

India than is the Tantric. They both include worship with non-vegetarian food offerings

and alcohol to fierce, and sometimes, capricious beings for protection from the ills they

may cause. They reside in specific places, engender possession (āveśa), may instigate
and gratify sexual desire, and be invoked to assist in ‘black’ magical rites to subjugate

others or for special assistance in the course of daily life, a crisis, or danger. Invoked for

higher spiritual practice, they are considered to be especially powerful spiritual beings.

Just as the Tantric modality predominated in the generally dualist Siddhānta
Āgamas, the Kaula modality predominated right from their inception in the traditions of

the more nondualist Bhairava Tantras, especially those belonging to the Vidyāpīṭtha (see

Sanderson 1988 and Dyczkowski 1988: 104 ff.). The Kula modality or method is
fundamentally related to the extensive Yoginī cults'‘of these Bhairava Tantras, as the
original Kulas were groupings of Yoginīs associated with their predecessors, the Eight
Mothers (mātṛkā). Kula Iiterally means ‘family°, which is both the ‘familyʼ or group of

TANTRĀLOKA

deities headed by the main deity of a Kula, who is its ‘leader’ (kulanāyikā or

kulanāyaka), and the ‘family of Kaula practitioners, headed and led by their teacher.

Yoginīs proliferates to immense degrees to form ‘families” of Yoginīs, from

which emerge the Great Goddesses, first of the Bhairava Tantras, especially those

belonging to the Vidyāpīṭtha (‘the sacred seat of Vidyā’ — i.e., the female Mantra deities)
(see below, note 1,272 and 1,776); then, when they developed independently, the Kaula

Tantras. Accordingly, the teachings of the Kulas are said to come from the ‘Yoginī’s

mouthʼ. The MV refers to independent ‘kulaśāstras’ (MV 1/49). At the same time, it is
clear that within the ambit of the system the MV is expounding, it perceives that only

certain prescriptions are specifically Kaula (kuloktavidhi). Chapter nineteen is dedicated

to Kauḷla practice (kaulikavidhī), which aims at the attainment of accomplishments

(siddhi) of the yogis who follow the Kula path (ibid. 19/100-101ab). The rites should
begin with the worship of a specifically kulacakra (ibid. 19/5). Moreover, it is clear that
the practitioner initiated in the Trika of the MV also belongs to a particular Kula, as the

Tantra enjoins that he should repeat only the mantra of his own Kula (ibid. 19/9), which
is related to a particular quarter of space.
In the course of time, the Yoginīs developed their own independent schools and
scriptures, called ‘Kulāgama’. The distinction between one and the other traditions to

which particular Kulāgamas belonged was, as with the Tantras of other sorts,
determined by the principal deity from which they originated and on which its principal
rites and yogic practices focused. Thus, Kula doctrine and practice adapted to the
specific sectarian context of the particular school of the Bhairava Tantras in which it

appeared. The pliable nature of Kula as a ‘modality’ or method allowed the formation of
Tṛrikakulas and Kālīkulas, for example, within the Bhairava Tantras, that thus remained
Śaivite despite the very large Śākta input of the Kula modality. The distinctive feature
of these systems is not so much their doctrinal or even symbolic content, although they
are configured in a specific way in each system. What is most distinctive is the principal
deity or group of deities (Yoginīs and Bhairavas) which is the focus of each one.
At first sight, it may seem that Jayaratha understands Kulaprakriyā to be

simply what is taught in the Kulāgamas, and Tantraprakriyā that of the

Siddhāntāgamas. However, the distinction between them is not so straightforward.
Jayaratha explains that Tantraprakriyā is taught in all the five currents of the Śaivāgama.
Theṣse include both the Siddhāntāgamas and the Bhairava Tantras. Their close relationship

is expressed by an interesting analogy. The five currents of Śaiva scripture issue from the
five faces of Sadāśiva. Jayaratha links them to the Tantraprakriyā. Associated with them

are the five configurations of energies embodied in Yoginīs, who constitute the core of the
Kālīkula. These are worshipped in what Jayaratha calls the ‘special modality
(visiṣaprakriyā). Thus, it is clear that Tantraprakriyāis not simply Śaivasiddhānta. Indeed,
Abhinava’s construction of the rites of the Tantraprakriyā
draws from various sources,

including the Trika MV as well as Siddhānta sources, the Siddhānta-like Svacchandatantra,

and other Bhairava Tantras. Tantraprakriyā is already a mix of the two modalities at the

original scriptural level, especially in the Bhairava Tantras. Generally, in most

Siddhāntāgamas the Kula modality is absent or very poorly represented. However, they
supply a substantial part of the basic worldview and practice of the Bhairava Tantras — one
could say that part which makes them Śaiva in the broad sense — although they also contain
much that is distinctive. Thus, they are especially centred on the worship of Yoginīs, which
is largely absent in the Siddhānta, and female divinities, who are secondarily there.
Moreover, as we have noted already, the offerings are derived from bodily substances.

Perceiving his sources globally from the Trika perspective, Abhinava draws from one and

then the other to form his composite system, just as the Tantras themselves do, but he does

so more systematically, drawing from a larger pool and taking care also to name his

sources, which Tantras only rarely do. Thus, he may begin with a rite drawn from one


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


declares, the Kula modality is more fundamental (prādhānya) than
other
modalities, (Matsyendranātha, the teacher) who brought it (down to earth)
and is

the lord of the fourth (Kali age) (turyanātha), is praised first, in accord with

the teaching described in (passages) such (as the following):

source and then present its equivalent from a Tantra of a different school. In this

way his

Tantraprakriyā includes so many Kaula elements that even when they are not the basic
rite,
they are presented as the highest and most important part of it. They are not
just

altemmatives. They empower and complete the rite. This is a major reason

why Abhinava

considers Kaulism to excel, and moreover, that Trika is its highest form. These Jayaratha

calls ‘special modalitiss' because he wishes to maintain, true to Abhinava’
s exegesis, the
purity of Kulaprakriyā. Tantraprakriyā is the basic, necessary, and essential
modality of
ritual that musṭ be regularly performed (nityakarmaṇ). In this sense, Kulaprakriyā
s not an
independent modality. However, it is, insofar as it draws exclusively from Kaula
elements.
This independence is represented by the view that the Kulaprakriyā īs the
teaching of a

sixth current, which comes from the Yoginī’s mouth (see below, 28/146cd-147

comm.).

and

Distinguishing between these two liturgical modalities, Abhinavagupta treats

the rituals of the Tantraprakriyā as basic (nitya), and those of the Kulaprakr

optional ones (naimittika), for which only some initiates are fit. The rites

iyā as

described in

chapters fifteen to twenty-eight belong predominantly (but not entirely)
to the former
modality, while chapter twenty-nine is concerned exclusively with Kulaprakr
iyā, the focus
of which is Ādiyāga (the ‘firṣṭ’ or ‘foremost’ sacrificial rite) or Kulayāga,
which

involves the offering and consumption of meat, wine and the sexual fluids produced

during ritual intercourse. The remaining eight chapters are concerned
with common
matters that are accessory to the rituals of the Tantrāloka, such as the drawing
of the Trika
maṇḍala, mantras, the authoritativeness of the scriptures, and more. The
two together
constitute the liturgy (paddhati) of the Anuttaratrika (see below, 1/14),
which Jayaratha
calls anuttaratrikārthaprakriyā (below comm. on 1/16). We will see a little
further ahead
that Jayaratha explains that the Tantraprakriyā was taught in the tradition
(mathikā)
founded by Traiyambaka (also called Tryambakāditya) (introductory
lines below to

1/8), who taught nondualist Śaivism, whereas Āmardaka and Śrīnātha taught its

and dualist-cum-nonḍualist form, respectively (see below 36/11-15)

dualist

. A fourth lineage

issuing from Śaiva monastic centres (maṭhīkā), called ardha(tryambaka)maṭhikā,

was

founded by Tryambaka’s daughter (below TĀv ad 1/8). This transmitted
the teachings
of the Trikakula, which is roundly identified with the Kula modality.

Note that we have n0 record mentioning this fourth transmission prior to

Abhinava. Thiṣ surprising fact leads one to reflect on the possibility

that it was a

convenient fiction. But whether it was or not, we have here an indigenous Kashmiri
Trika lineage that right from the stat it is closely connected to the transmission of
nondualist Śaiva philosophy that developed into the Pratyabhijñā, thus mirroring
Abhinava’s exegesis of Trika. It is also very significant that the unnamed founder figure
is a woman. Women assuming the role of a guru is notoriously rare in India except in
Kaula traditions (including the Buddhist ones). The highest Kaula teachings
are

transmitted by Yoginīs, as happens in the Krama also, thus underscoring the

strongly

Kaula identity of the Trika of this Kashmiri mathikā. See Dyczkowski 2009, intro. vol.
2, p. 266-273.
'Abhinavagupta praises Matsyendranātha first, before all the other teachers mentione
d

at the beginning of his monumental Tantrāloka. In this way, he clearly
declares his
predilection for Kaulism. The Kula modality is a secret practice (rahasyav
idhī) (below,
29/1-2ab), which is particularly associated with the transmission of
the Siddhas
(siddhakrama) known as the Yuganāthas (Lords of the Ages), who taught Kaulism
in each

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Beloved, Bhairavī (first) obtained (the teachings concerning the

practice of Kaula) Yoga from Bhairava and, having obtained it,' O fair-faced
one, it was then (received) from her presence by the Siddha called Mīna, that is,

by the great soul, Macchanda,'! in the great seat (mahāpīṭha) of Kāmarūpa.

uúta%ômB'ErgJēEauīī

TGGĪTRTT aTRITŠ THR
of the four Ages (cf. Sanderson 1988: 681), and so Matsyendra, the teacher of this fourth
Age, was the fourth Nātha (see below, comm. on 29/3). He may well have been a

historical figure. If so, he probably lived sometime between the 8 and 9 century, when

references to him began to appear in the Tantras. Matsyendra is a major authority. The
founder of an independent Kula, of which the Kaulajñānanirṇaya and other such Tantras
attributed to him are the scriptures, he is regarded as the founder of all Kaulism. The deities

of the KJN are Kuleśvara and Kuleśvarī, that is, Bhairava and Bhairavī, who are

identified with Akula and Kula. They are worshipped in the midst of a circle of the
Eight Mothers whom they govern, along with, by extension, all the Yoginīs that

emanate from them. Neither the god nor the goddess in the KIN has a specific identity.

AII the gods of the Kaula type are Bhairavas and the goddesses Bhairavīs. One could

simply say in a nondescript way that they are Śiva and Śakti. Thus, one could describe
the cult of the KJN as non-sectarian Kaulism. Some other works attributed to
Matsyendra, such as the printed Akulavīratantra and the unpublished Kulapañcaśikā,
are of the same type. However, we also have examples of sectarian texts attributed to
Matsyendra. One is the Guhyasiddhi, which should not be confused with its Buddhist

namesake. Overall, this text is also non-sectarian, but it contains passages that relate it

to the Kubjikā tradition. One wonders whether they were inserted to appropriate it to the

Kubjikā cult. Another sectarian text attributed to Matsyendra is the Ūrmikaulārṇava,
which belongs to the Kālīkrama (one could also call it the Kālīkula). More significantly,

Matsyendranātha is regularly worshipped along with the three Nāthas, as mentioned

above, in the Tantras belonging to the Kālīkrama. We find this for example in the

Devīpañcaśataka, which as we shall see is a major Tantra of this Kaula school.
Abhinava prescribes the same at the beginning of the Kaula liturgy taught below in

chapter twenty-nine. Matsyendra’s importance in the traditions of the Kulāgama, and the
absence of references to him prior to their development, suggests that before him Kaulism
existed only in the diffuse form outlined in the previous note as a special, more deeply

secret teaching of the Yoginī cults of the Bhairava Tantras. Thus, although not the founder

of Kaulism in its earliest forms, Matsyendra represents a major watershed in its
development, at a point where it originated independently. The transition out of this
pervasive presence into independent Kaula schools is signalled by his legendary
intervention, which we shall examine below in note 143. See Dyczkowski 1988: pp. 65,

83 ff. and Dyczkowski 2009, vol. 2, p. 319 ff.
RṞead prāpya for vyāpya.
'! Sanderson (2009: 27 n. 73 and 2007: 264 n. 94) suggests that the name Macchanda

(which means ‘fisherman’) is probably derived from the Middle Indo-aryan synonym
macchaṁda (< macchabaṁdha). The name Matsyendra can be explained as a
Sanskritisation of Macchanda, and Mīnanātha as a synonym of Matsyendra, both of

which mean Lord of the Fish. Concerning the various related names of
Matsyendranatha, see Dyczkowski 1988: 163 n. 23.

' Concerning the location of Kāmarūpa (which is in Assam) and the other ‘great seats’

(mahāpīṭha), see Dyczkowski 2009: intro. vol. 1, pp. 553 ff.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


aāT-̄ a Tīz-zfāJ:

1|

rāgāruṇaṁ granthibilāvakīrṇaṁ
yo jālam ātānavitānavṛtti |
kalombhitaṁ bāhyapathe cakāra
stān me sa macchandavibhuḥ prasannaḥ || 7 ||

May the pervasive lord Macchanda (the Fisherman) be pleased
with me, he who cast along the outer path the net (of Māyā) that, red with
(colour and) attachment, fashioned (artistically) with (many) parts (kalā)
and strewn with knots and holes, spreads and extends (in all directions).


' This verse draws some elements from the third passage cited by Jayaratha in the
commentary. Abhinava alludes to a well-known legend, of which there are numerous
versions (see Bagchi 1934: 21 ff.), relating the origins of the Kulāgama. As Trika is a

Kula system, its scriptures are understood to belong to this corpus or to be closely

related to it. Accordingly, as Kula is the highest form of Śaivism, Abhinava first praises
the teacher Matsyendra, who revealed it, before all the other teachers. Matsyendra is

said to have recovered it from the belly of a fish he caught in a ‘net of energiesʼ, to

which Abhinava alludes in this verse. The version in the Kaulajñānanirṇaya, which is
one of the earliest, reads as follows. The god is speaking to the goddess:

‘When I went along with you to the Island of the Moon, (our son) Kārttikeya
came in the form of a young boy. In a deluded state, (he) stole the (Kula) śāstra. 0

goddess, you told me that Kaārtiikeya stole it. O fair lady, I went to the sea and looked
(everywhere) with the vision of knowledge. O beloved, having caught a fish (I) cut open

(its) belly. Taking (the śāstra) that was in the belly of the fish, (I) took it home. Once
wrapped in the cloth of knowledge, my (śāstra) was concealed and protected. Then, O
mistress of the gods, (Kārttikeya) was angry and that same (god, assuming the form of
a) mouse, made a hole and from the tunnel (he bored), (the śāstra) was thrown into the

sea.

It was eaten by a great fish of vast size. I became angry and made a net of energy
(śaktijāla). The fish was (caught in the net) and dragged out of the seven seas. 0

beloved, that great fish did not come (out of the net). His strength was as great as mine.

Generated by the radiant energy of knowledge, he was hard to overcome even by the
gods. (I) then abandoned (my) Brahmin (caste-status) and (assumed) the nature of a
fisherman. O goddess, I am that fisherman and I made (for myself) the condition of a

fisherman. I then dragged the fish caught in the net of energy (out of the water), and
having cut open the belly of the fish, took the Kulāgama. O greatly meritorious one!

Although a Brahmin, I assumed the condition of a fisherman. The Brahmin who killed a

fish is known as Matsyaghna (the Killer of the Fish). As (I) created the condition of
(that) fisherman, (this) leader of Brahmins is a fisherman.’ (KIN 14/27-37)

The main points of this story, including some not mentioned in this reference,
can be summarized as follows. The Kulāgama was revealed by a fisherman in
Candradyīpa (‘the Island of the Moon’). The fisherman was Matsyendranātha, who was
originally a Brahmin who renounced his Brahminical status to secure this secret
knowledge. He then went to Kāmarūpa, where he revealed it for the first time. The
Kulāgama was stolen from Candradvīpa by Kārttikeya in the form of a mouse (muṣaka

lit. ‘thief’), who threw it into the sea, where it was devoured by a big fish.
Matsyendranātha caught the fish and recovered the scripture from its belly, which is

TANTRĀLOKA

‘He’ is Macchanda (i.e., Matsyendranātha), famous as the one who

brought all the Kula scripture (śāstra) down (to earth) (avatāraka).

“The fish (naccha) are said to be the bonds, which are the fickle

fluctuations of the mind. As he has severed them (chedita) in the past, he is

called Macchanda.’

According to such statements, Macchanda, whose nature is to sever the

fetters, is the ‘pervasive lord’ because he is endowed with the Supreme Lord’s

penetrating absorption (samāveśa). ‘May He be pleased with me’. The
meaning is: may He reveal (my inherent) competence to share with others (and
participate in) the vision of my own (true) Self (svātmadarśana).

The ‘netʼ, in which fish are caught, is Māyā, which is like magic.

(Abhinava says that) he ‘cast it along the outer path’, in accord with such
statements as:

why he is also called Matsyaghna (or Macchagna) ‘the Killer of the Fish’. It is hard to
say how close to the ‘original’ form of the myth this version is. As his name suggests,
Matsyendra — the Lord of the Fish — was in all probability represented as a fisherman in
the very first legends. Abhinavagupta portrays him casting his net in the ocean of

transmigration. However, he is silent about his original brahminical status. Similarly, in

the version of the myth narrated in the Kularatvoddyota, a Kubjikā Tantra,
Matsyendranātha is not said to be a Brahmin. However, the author of the KIN —

whether, as the colophons claim, he was Matsyendranātha himself or not — is anxious to
stress that the founder of Kaulism was a Brahmin. He was not a real fisherman, we are
told, but Bhairava himself who, when in human form is, first of all, a Brahmin, and then

if he chooses to be, of any caste, however low. It sounds at first as if the original

Matsyendra was indeed a low-caste fisherman and that his authority to recover —or,
some might prefer, compose — sāstra is derived from his being originally a Brahmin.

Again, the fact that the śāstra is inside a fish compels the person who wishes to recover

it, to kill it. In other words, the Brahmin Matsyendra had to fall from his high caste

status to that of a low-caste fisherman in order to gain access to the Kulāgama. The

message is that this is the ‘fall’ every Brahmin will have to undergo. However, this

degradation in caste terms is an upgrade in terms of Kaula practice. Indeed, if he were

not to know Sanskrit, one would wonder whether he was not originally a low-caste
fisherman who in these legends is upgraded by claiming for him an earlier high-caste

status. See Dyczkowski 2009, intro. vol.2,

p. 318, ff.

' This and the following two unidentified citatons praising Matsyendranātha appear to

be drawn from one or more Kaula texts specifically associated with Matsyendranātha.

“ Ṛead purā for yadā.
“ Svāīmadarśanasaṁvibhāga- may also mean ‘to share with others my own/his own

vision (of reality). In other words, Jayaratha is saying that Abhinavagupta is inherently
fit to have a vision of his true nature and share it with others. Even so, he prays to

Matsyendranātha to reveal it to him, and also implicitly (if we take the ‘me’ to refer to
oneself not just Abhinavagupta) to others like him.

'“ The word ‘magic’ translates indrajāla, which literally means ‘Indra’s net’. Indra is

the king of the gods. He appears in the Atharvaveda as a magician who performs
conjuring tricks by casting the net of delusion on his audience (AV 8/8/8). Swami
Lakṣhmanjoo (1995: 5): ‘The principles from Earth to Māyā are one great net which is

transmigratory existence. In it are caught the fish in the form of those who are ignorant
because of their countless desires which are the latent traces of the objects of sense.”


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘There are eight Siddhas, great souls who are behind the net (jālapṛṣtha)

(of Māyā) and are beautifully radiant (with their spiritual power) (sutejas).’

The meaning is that (Abhinava is saying that) by paying close attention

to the nature of the Fourth State (of supreme consciousness)’ and so, by

removing the contraction (which confines consciousness), I lead (my disciples)

to the state that cannot be an object of attention (anavadheyatā).

And that (net) is ‘red (with colour)’, that is, it is coloured (rāga) red

with (some red) substance such as ochre, as well as with the metaphysical

principle (called) ‘Attachment’ (rāgatattva).' (Coloured red in this way,) it

casts forth and proceeds (gacchati). Thus, in accord with (its etymological)
meaning,' (the net) is also the unfolding of each particular plane of duality. It

is ‘strewn with knotsʼ, that is, it is pervaded by fetters ‘and holesʼ, that is,
places where water passes out (through it).“ (We can also analyse this

compound to mean) ‘in the knot’ (in the sense of) within this, the second type

(bheda) of Maāyā. Itis ‘strewn’, that is, pervaded ‘with holesʼ (in two senses,

' Swami Lakshmanjoo (1995: 5): ‘It is said that Macchananātha by his own free will
placed eight great souls who shine with their own innate radiance above the great net
which is transmigratory existence. They teach all those people who are penetrated by the

descent of the power (of grace) how they should avoid the noose of this net of Māyā
and, abiding above it should shine (in the same way).’

' Matsyendra, the Nātha of this the fourth (kali) Age, is the fourth Nātha, here
implicitly identified with the Fourth State of supreme consciousness, beyond the three

states of waking, dreaming and deep sleep.

“ Cf. below, 2/12.

'! Concerning rāgatattva — the metaphysical principle of attachment, as distinct from a

personal attachment to something, see below, 9/199cd-201ab.
' Read īrayati for iyarti.
' The word ‘rāga’ ‘attachment’ or ‘colour’ is here said to be derived from these two
words formed from the root ‘ī’ which as a causative has the sense of ‘to agitate, throw,

and castʼ and ʻgamʼ’ ʻto goʼ.

' The knots of the net of Māyā are binding, and its holes do not allow higher states of

consciousness to be retained within its domain. Plotinus (c. 204-270 CE) makes use of
the same metaphor. Coleman Barks (2010: p. 9) explains: ‘Plotinus has a wonderfu

metaphor for the predicament of human consciousness: a net thrown into the sea. This is
what we are with our longings, our works of art, our loves. We are the net. Soul is the
ocean we are in, but we cannot hold onto it. We cannot own any part of what we swim
within, the mystery we love so. Yet the longing we feel is there because of soul. To
some degree we are what we are longing for. Some part of the ocean swims inside the
fish. In Plotinus’s view the visible universe — the entire cosmos, nature, ourselves, and
all that we do — is a net thrown into the ocean of soul:
‘The cosmos is like a net thrown into the sea, unable to make it its own.

Already the sea is spread out, and the net spreads with it as far as it can, for no one of its
parts can be anywhere else than where it is. But because it has no size, the Soulʼ’s nature

is sufficiently ample to contain the whole cosmic body in one and the same grasp.”
Ennead 4 section 9
' Māyā, also called the Night (niśā), ‘perceives and forges the duality between one’s
own (conscious) nature and the flux of phenomena (bhāvaugha) that manifests clearly

within the jewel of the pure, free Self.’ (below 4/112). It is not only the distortion of the

TANTRĀLOKA

that is,) with the cavities (bilākāra) that are called (its) wombs (bhaga), and

(from another point of view,) the planes of worldly experience. It ‘spreads
and extends (in all directions)ʼ. It has length and breadth because it is

omniform and its nature is to extend in every direction. It is ‘fashioned with
(many) parts (kalā)˚. (Each part) is a particular limitation, or else ‘part’ (kalā)
(may also mean) the principle of limited agency (kalātattva), (the implied) sense
being that it is ‘fashionedʼ, that is, made (with all the principles from there)

down to (that of) Earth.' As is said:

‘The net is Māyā. One who contemplates Kula should tear it apart.
(This) great net is omniform and is strung together with the threads of the
channels (of the vital breath) (nāḍī). Endowed with the worlds and the senses, it
is made firm with the knots of the principles (tattva) and is associated with the
power of limited agency (kalā) and attachment (raga) (of the fettered soul) . . .
and s0 on.
‘(The teachings had been lost, and s0) then at the command of the

venerable '“Śṛīkaṇṭha, (three) Siddhas came down (to earth). (They were) the
perception of duality, it is also a kind of substance which is the material cause of the
unmanifest state of Nature (prakṛti) and so, ultimately, of all its products (9/40cd-42ab).

As the Night, it contains them all as countless potential energies (9/150cd-151ab); as

such it is the insentient (13/3-5) principle of Māyā (māyātattva). Māyā is also called the
Cavity (bila), the Abyss (gahvara) (9/212) and the Cave (guhā) (9/208ab), because this
worldly life of duality is dark as is a cave or a deep crevice in the earth in which things
are only perceived dimly (below 8/305ab (8/304)). Again, Jayaratha (ad 8/259ab-260cd
(8/258cd-260ab)) explains that ‘Māyā is of two kinds, as the Knot (of ignorance)
(granthi) and the principle (tartva) (which correspond to its disturbed and undisturbed

aspects). (See also TĀv ad 9/154ab). The Knot of Māyā brings about the ‘contracted’

condition of consciousness, in which duality between perceivers and their objects
prevails (see below, note to TĀv ad 8/9-10). Maāyā itselfis defined as the ‘Knot’ (note to
TĀv ad 4/38). World orders (bhuvana) are distributedin these two aspects (8/298cd

(8/298ab) ff.; also 9/149 ff.) as well as a third, namely, the energy (śakti) of Māyā. Thus,
there are three forms of Māyā, as the power (māyāśakti), as the Knot (māyāgranthi) and

as the principle (māyātattva). As reported by John Hughes, according to Swami

Lakshmanjoo (without reference to any source), these three are accompanied by the
three impurities and generate them, namely, Āṇavamala, Māyīyamala and Kārmamala,
respectively.

' Mayā is the energy of consciousness which generates objectivity. It is the Goddess,

who is represented as the Womb (yoni, bhaga) from which the universe issues forth.
The one womb of Māyā is said to consist of the countless wombs from which issue the

world orders, and the countless individual worlds of each of the innumerable living

beings (see below, 8/309ab-310cd (8/308cd-310ab)). The ʻ‘holesʼ represent both the

worlds, which are planes on which individual souls experience the consequences, good

and bad, of their respective Karma, and their sources. In other words, these worlds are
‘the wombs’ of Māyā into which individual souls are reborn.

' The principle of limited agency, that is, the Force (of limited agency) (kalā), is the

last of a series of six principles called the Obscuring Coverings (kañcuka), that are
directly related to Māyā. Beyond them are the Pure Principles, that are not conditioned
by it. The Impure Principles, in which the duality of Māyā dominates, extend from the

principle of Māyā down to the principle of Earth.
Read as below (36/11c): tadā śrīkaṇṭha- for śrīmacchrīkaṇṭha-.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


ones called Tryambaka and Amardaka (along with) Śriṇātha, who were skilled

respectively in the nondual, dual and dual-cum-nondual teachings of Śiva
(śivaśāsana). The first one gave rise to a second lineage that (originated) from
the school (krama) (of his) daughter which, well-established, is called the

lineage of Ardhatryambaka (Half of Tryambaka).' Thuṣ there are three and a

half orders (maṭhikā)' (that have originated) here from the lineages (of the
Śaiva) tradition (santatikrama).
According to this view, which will be stated further ahead, amongst the
three and a half orders (maṭhikā) called Śrīsantati, Amardaka, Traiyambaka and

Ardha-traiyambaka,' the Tantra modality (tantraprakriyā) which will be

'N Śrṛīkaṇṭha is the form of Śiva who creates the lower principles (below, 6/153ab
(6/152)), and is the Lord of the deities who preside over world-orders within the domain

of Māyā, which he destroys and recreates in each cosmic cycle (6/50ab-153ab (6/149152)). Śrīkaṇṭha is also the first teacher, that is, the form of Śiva who reveals the
Śaivāgama (TĀv ad 8/9-10 and 36/11) and brings it into the world (37/16cd-17).

' From a Kaula perspective, women are considered to be innately more spiritually

advanced than men. Accordingly, they are given an abbreviated form of initiation which

is said to be ‘half’ the one a man receives. This may be why this lineage, which passes
through a woman, is considered to be ‘half’ that of Tryambaka.
The spread of Śaiva schools in the Indian subcontinent was marked by the foundation
of monastic centres called mnaṭhas. The renunciates who belonged to initiatory lineages
of the founders of these centres and went on to found centres of their own referred to

themselves as members of the original mnatha, and so the term came to be used as yet
another word for ‘tradition’, ‘lineage’, ‘school’ or ‘order’. Sections of the Siddhānta

Āgamas dealing with their lineages, transmissions and scriptures delight in enumerating
maṭhas, and distinguishing them from one another by various ritual features, practices,

etc. In actual fact, a number of Siddhānta maṭhas do appear in inscriptions, and some

buildings have even survived in North India around Gwalior, Candrai and Satna which

belong to the 10th century (see Mishra 2005). These affiliated themselves to the
Mattamayūra Maṭha, Another important maṭha was founded by Amardaka, who may be

identified with the Śaiva teacher said above to have been the founder of dualiṣṭ-cumnondualist Śaivism. The schools associated with the Bhairava Tantras formally followed
suit, although originally the Kāpālika-like ascetics of these traditions were probably not
as well institutionalized as their ‘clean’, more purity-conscious Siddhānta counterparts.
Perhaps a sense of that difference is perceivable in the use of the diminutive ‘maṭhikā’
‘small matha’. The picture seems to be even more idealized in the Bhairava Tantras. In

the JY, for example, we find a long list of mmaṭhikas, far more than one could reasonably

suppose really existed as concrete places. Some echo of this system remains nowadays
in the division of the Nāga sannyasins into maḍhis affilated to parent akhāras. See
Dyczkowski 1988: 200 n. 53.

These lines correspond to 36/ lcd-14ab below. The last line, not quoted by Jayaratha

says: “and (they) were extended into a hundred branches by disciples and their
disciples.’ See also ŚDr 7/107-111, quoted below in TĀv ad 1/8.
In the verses that follow, Abhinava goes on to pay homage to Somānanda, who
was the teacher of the founder of the Pratyabhijñā school, which is thus understood to be

a direct development from the nondualist Śaiva teachings of the Tryambaka lineage. He
continues by praising his disciple Utpaladeva, and then Utpaladeva’s disciple
Lakṣmaṇagupta, from whom he learnt Pratyabhijñā.

' Cf. below, 4/265cd-267ab and 36/11cd-14. This is the lineage founded by
Traiyambika’s daughter, through which Trika was transmitted. Note that Jayaratha is
careful here not to say that the Tantra modality is the predominant fundamental one.

TANTRĀLOKA

explained has come down through the Traiyambakamatṭhikā as the one common
(basic one) (sāmānya). Accordingly, (Abhinavagupta now) (tāvat) directs our
attention to (those) teachers.

r̥ã sī̄aṀ̃ īa? TTATĪ-TŪGṀTṀJHĪPJThTHGṀRTĪHIT:1|/¢ 11
traiyambakābhihītasantatitāmraparṇī-

sanmauktikaprakarakāntiviśeṣabhājaḥ |

pūrve jayanti guravo guruśāstrasindhu
kallolakelikalanāmalakarṇadhārāḥ || 8 ||

The ancient teachers triumph. Possessing the special beauty of the

multitude of authentic pearls from the Tāmraparṇī (river) of the
That would not be correct, as Trikais Kaula. But it is true that the Tantric modality,

which is basic common Āgamic Śaivism, is common to all, including Trika, that
encompasses both modalities.

'“ The Tamraparṇī is a large river that flows down from its source in the Malaya

Mountain in Karṇataka to the end of Tamil Nadu in South India. Although the original

transmissions are said to take place on Mount Kailash, it is possible that Abhinava here

implicitly connects these teachers in some way with South India. Śambhunātha’s
teacher, Sumati, is said to be from ‘a sacred seat in the southī (dakṣiṇabhumipīṭha) (see
below, 1/212cd-123ab and comm). We know from the Yaśastilaka, which was written
by a Jain monk called Somadeva in South India in the ninth century, that Trika existed

there as a Kaula school that taught (n0 doubt amongst other things) basic Kaula practice,
i.e., sexual rites and the offerings of wine and meat to the Trika deities (see Dyczkowski
1988: 6). Maheśvarananada, who lived and wrote in South India around the 13th
century, quotes from a large number of Kashmir Śaiva texts as well as original Trika

and Krama sources known to Abhinavagupta, although not many Tantras. The Śrīvidyā
teachers like Amṛtānanda and Śivānanda (who was Maheśvarananada’s teacher) wrote
extensive commentaries on the Nityāṣoḍaśikārṇava (the Ocean of the Sixteen Nityā
(Yoginīs)) and the Yoginīhṛdaya (the Heart of the Yoginīs), both root Tantras of the
Śrīvidyā (i.e., Tripurā) tradition, as well as independent works on the same subject.
They did this from the perspective of the Kashmiri masters, whom they knew very well
and quoted from extensively. The Krama system flourished there at least into the 14th
century. Important texts were written there. Amongst them are two called
Mahānayaprakāśa. One was written by Arṇasiṁha, and the other by an unknown
author. Another great work was the Cidgaganacandrikā, by Śrīvatsa, who belonged to
Arṇasiṁha’s lineage. These were followed by Maheśvarānanda’s Mahārthamañjarī, the
root verses of which are in early Maharastrian, revealed to Maheśvarānanda by a Yoginī
in the land of the Colas (modern Tamil Nadu) in the mystic state between waking and
dreaming (MM verse 71). The substantial number of works Maheśvarānanda quotes

unknown to the Kashmiris is testimony in itself to vigorous development there of these
traditions. However, in Kashmir itself, Muslim rule that was imposed from the middle
of the 14" century had largely brought a halt to further major developments. It seems
that some forms continued in the South practically up to the present day, mostly in


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


(spiritual) lineage named Traiyambaka, they are the stainless helmsmen
(of
the boat that crosses) the ocean of the teachers’ scripture, that heaves
with
the play of (mighty) waves.
The ‘spiritual lineage named Traiyambaka’ is (his) order (maṭhikā

).


This is the meaning. Thus:


‘In the past the Śaiva and other secret (teachings) were (oral traditions
preserved) in the cavity of the mouths of (those) great souls, the (Vedic)

and grace operated within them. (However,) with the coming of

the Kali Age

and their departure, the teaching, of which the foremost was that of the Śiva
and
other groups (of Śaivāgāmas), became inaccessible and was 105." (Then) the

God (Śiva), wandering on mount Kailāsa in the (mortal) form

came down (from there) onto the surface of the earth in order to grace
(the
world,) and (said to) the chaste sage Durvāsa: “produce (another)
secret
(teaching) similar to that so that the scripture (śāstra) may not be lost.”'
Then,

once that Lord (Durvāsa) had received the command from the god (to do
s0),
with effort he generated a mind-born son called Tryambakāditya (to
propagate

Kerala, where Śākta cults were and still are much revered, unlike Tamil Nadu, where
the preference is for mild Sadāśiva and his male-dominated, vegetarian cult.
In the case

of the Siddhānta, practically the opposite happened. In the early stages of the
exegesis of
the Siddhānta Āgamas, between the 8th and 11th centuries, the first teachers,
beginning
with Sadyojyotiṣ down through Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha and Rāmakaṇṭha,
who wrote
commentaries on certain Siddhānta Āgamas and independent works
expounding and
defending Siddhānta theology, were all Kashmiris. Siddhānta Śaiviṣm continue
d to exist
in a few places in North India at least into the 14th century. After that
it practically
ceased there, probably because of the Muslim domination. in the South,
far from the

Muslims, it flourished, but largely set aside the earlier Kashmiri teachers, who wrote

exclusively in Sanskrit, for its own, who wrote in Tamil as well as Sanṣkrit.

'“ Read, as in the edition of the Śivadrṣṭi, durgamagocare for durgamagocaram.
The
printed edition of the ŚDṛ reads: kalāpigrāmapramukhe samucchinne ca
śāsane for
kalāpigrāmapramukham ucchinne śivaśāsane. Accepting the reading in the ŚDṛ for
the

second half of this line, I have tentatively emended kalāpigrāmapramu
khe, which
makes no sense, to śivādigrāmapramukhe.

' Read with the edition of the ŚDr, nocchidyeta for nocchidyate.
“ ŚḌr 7/107-111. With these verses begins this account found at the end of
the
published edition of the Śivadṛṣti of the legendary history of how the nondual teachings
of Tṛyambaka reached Somānanda. Nemec (2011: 22), observing that most manuscripts

do not include this passage, argues that it may not have been part of the
original text.
Nonetheless, it has been accepted from early on as being an authentic
, traditional

account, as Jayaratha’s quotation of it demonstrates. Moreover, Abhinava clearly refers
to this account in the ĪPV 3, p. 402, where, commenting on the word ‘śivadṛṣṭī

says:

’, he

iti tadgatamāśrīkaṇṭhanāthāt guruparvakramaṁ sūcayati | tatra hi śrīśṛīka

Śšāsane samutsanne śrīdurvāsomuniṁ tadavatāraṇāya dideśa, so 'pi Śśrītrya
mbakādityaṁ
traiyambakākhye lokaprasiddhyā tairimbābhidhāne gurusantāne pravarta
yitāraṁ
mānasaṁ sasarja, - ityādi vitatya uktam | Śśrīkaṇṭhanāthaś ca adhigatat
attvaḥ

TANTRĀLOKA

As is said in such statements, the one called the venerable Śrīkaṇṭha,

who lived on Kailāsa, was the first teacher. This is because he brought down
through the lineage of Traiyambaka the wisdom of the Trika tradition

(saḍardhakramavijñāna) which, severed from the stain of the (present) Age of

Strife (kali), is the secret (and ultimate purport) of all the scriptures.

śrīmadanantanāthāt, so 'pi śrībhagavacchakiūtaḥ ityādi āgameṣu nirāpitam iii
saṁpūrṇo guruparvakramaḥ uktaḥ |

‘There it is said at length that when the teaching was about to be lost the

venerable Śrīkaṇṭhanātha taught it to the venerable sage Durvāsa so that it might be
brought down to earth. He also (in his turn) generated from (his) mind the venerable

Tryambakāditya, who was the founder of the lineage of teachers called Traiyambaka,

well-known in the world with the name Tairimba. Again, it is said in the Āgamas that

Śrīkaṇṭhanātha learnt the true (teaching) (tattva) from the venerable Anantanātha, and
he too from the consort of the venerable Lord and so on. Thus, the sequence of the
lineage of teachers has been taught completely.’

The account in Śivadṛṣṭi coṇtinues:


‘(To Tryambakāditya) he transmitted the secret in all respects. He too, having

gone to the cave appropriately called Tryambaka, subsequently with his mind generated
a son there by that name. Fully accomplished, he flew up into the sky. and his son,
(generated) in the same way, was a Siddha who similarly generated a son. In this way,

fourteen Siddhas up to the fifteenth son were well-versed in all the (Śaiva) teaching

(śāstra).

At some time, whilst engaged in a pilgrimage in the world, looking outwards,
he saw a Brahmin girl who was beautiful in form, youth, and auspicious good fortune

(saubhāgya). Having observed that she possessed the (right) characteristics and was a
virgin girl who was fit to be a proper wife for him, he himself went to (her) father and,

having requested (her of him, received his consent. Thus), with effort (and care, her

father) brought that Brahmin girl (to him). (In this way, another Siddha) who was like
him was born by virtue of that Brahminical wedding. Then, in (due) time, (his son,)

wandering around, came to Kashmir. His name was Saṁgamāditya and his son was

(called) Varṣāditya. He also had a son, the Lord (bhagavat) called Aruṇāditya. From

him was born a son of the same kind called Ānanda. I, who am such, and called

Somānanda, was born from him. I wrote (this) book called Śivadṛ: i. It is in this way
that their extensive order (mathikā), called Trṛyambakā (in Sanskrit) and Terambā in the
vernacular, has been proclaimed by disciples and their disciples (before me). I have in
this way provided this modest treatise; (but) even though I have undertaken it, the

teachers request that it should be adopted (and accepted as authoritative).’ 7/1 12-122ab

It is a significant fact that Abhinavagupta and others belonging to his tradition
invariably refer to this source as their authority for the division of the lineages of Śaiva

teachers in this perspective. The absence of references directly from scripture indicate
that this is an ulterior analysis of the main types of Śaiva teachings, distinguished in the
terms of the types of Śaiva philosophies rather than Tantric schools or scriptures.

Whereas the Śtīcahī, which is scripture, divides Śaiva scriptures into these three
categories, i.e., dual, dual-cum-nondual and nondual (see below, TĀv ad 1/18), here

Saiva lineages are classified in these terms.

'"Ś The teachers of the lineage that descended from Tryambaka, the founder of the

nondualist line, developed the philosophy of the Pratyabhijñā. His daughter transmitted

the Trika teachings. Abhinava mentions them again (below in 4/266). The presence of a


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


woman in the Trika transmission is significant. Although women are a small minority,
they appear at several critical junctures in the transmission of the Kashmiri Śaiva
schools. See, for example, below TĀv ad 4/173ab concerning the Krama lineages, in
which several women teachers figure. However, no earlier reference prior to Abhinava

has been traced to this lineage. We have seen that Traiyambaka and the other two
teachers are mentioned by Somānanda in his ŚDr, but he says nothing about

Traiyambaka’s daughter. One gets the impression that Abhinava is referring here to
some oral transmission, perhaps from his Trika teacher Śambhunātha. Such changes do

take place as traditions develop. In this case, it is a way of aligning Trika, which is

essentially a Tantric tradition, with the Pratyabhijñā, which is the nondual Śaiva
philosophical one.

The Traiyambaka order is equated with one called Teramba which, as we have

seen, according to Somānanda, is its name in the vernacular (ŚDṛ 7/121cd). Eighth

century inscriptions found in Śaivasiddhānta monasteries (maṭha) in northern Madhya

Pradesh refer to this order, which leads Sanderson to surmise that: ‘it seems likely that
the Teramba order’s connection with nondualism and Trika was a secondary
development within an originally Saiddhāntika organization’. For more details see

Sanderson 2005b, p.121, n.79.

Below (in 37/61ab-62ab (37/60-61)), Abhinava tells us that his teacher

Lakṣmaṇagupta belonged to the order of Tryambaka. As he was the direct disciple of
Utpaladeva, who leart from Somānanda, there can be no doubt that the Pratyabhijñā is
what is meant here by the nondualist Śaivism said to have originated from Tryambaka.
This is so even though Somānanda made a great personal contribution to it and even
more so Utpaladeva, who coined the term ‘pratyabhijñā’ (‘recognition’ of one’s own
identity with Śiva), from which the name of this school is derived. This line and its

teachings are clearly distinguishable from Trika Śaivism, even though Somānanda first,

and then Utpaladeva after him, make use of terminology found in the Śaiva Tantras. The
latter draws points of doctrine directly from Malinivijayottara. It is clear that a close
relationship was seen to exist between them early on by the Kashmiri tradition, and this
is evidenced by attributing the transmission of Trika Śaivism through Tryambaka’s

daughter (see note 138 above). One may argue that this is not mentioned in

Somāṉnanda’s account because it did not concern him, but more probably it is because
this link was set in place after him. At any rate, even if we accept that the mythical
Tryambaka taught both schools of nondualist Śaivism, i.e., the Pratyabhijñā and Trika,
the two are clearly distinguished right at the start of the transmission. The modern
identification of ‘Kashmiri Śaivismʼ (itself a name coined by modern scholars) with

Trika, as if the word ‘Trika’ were a translation of ‘Kashmiri Śaivismʼ, is very

misleading. In the context of ‘Kashmiri Śaivismʼ, Trika (or to be more precise Anuttara
Trika) is what Abhinavagupta expounds in the Tantrāloka and its two predecessors, the
Parāṭrīśikāvivaraṇa and before it the Mālinīvijayavārtika and the lost Pañcikā. Prior to

his works we must refer to original scriptural sources. There is no mention of Trika in

the earliest ‘Kashmiri Śaiva’ works, namely, the Śivasūtras and Spandakārikā, or even
in Somānanda. Although a connection may be discerned in Utpaladeva’s work, even so,

this does not entail the identification of the Pratyabhijñā with Trika. The first two and

most voluminous chapters of his Zśvarapratyabhijñā are entirely concerned with
philosophical issues, namely epistemology in the first chapter and causality and time in
the second. These are examined in great detail in the usual mode of Indian philosophical
discourse, that is, in the form of a debate, in this case with a hypothetical Buddhist

opponent. The last two chapters cannot be said to be philosophy in the same way.

Rather they expound Saiva theological dogmas concerning the nature of the binding
impurities of the soul, the metaphysical principles, states of consciousness and the like.
A major structuring feature of his exposition is the division of the hierarchy of

TANTRĀLOKA

(Having praised him), the occasion having presented itself (prasaṅgāt),

(Abhinava goes on) to exult the teachers of the other orders (mathikā).

mezaāī ftxīst 11 8 1

jayati gurur eka eva śrīśrīkaṇṭho bhuvi prathitaḥ |

tadaparamūrtir bhagavān maheśvaro bhūtirājaś ca || 9 ||
The venerable Śrīkaṇṭha, the one (unique) teacher who is well

known (prathita) in the world, triumphs, (as does) the lord (bhagavat)

Maheśvara, who is another of his forms, and Bhūtirāja (who is so also).


principles into the domains of a gradation of seven perceivers (see below, note 1,658).
Although this is found in the Siddhāntāgamas, the form presented by Utpaladeva
follows the MV. Here is a clear example of Trika’s input into the Pratyabhijñā.

Jayaratha is clearly conscious of both the distinction between them and their close

relationship. This he expresses by portraying them in terms of the two ‘methods’
(prakriyā), Tantric and Kauḷa (see above, note 1,129). The Pratyabhijñā belongs to the

Tantric method, which is basic nondualist Śaivism, common also to the Kaula method,
which

Trika

also

includes.

Thus,

there

is a great

deal

of Pratyabhij

in

Abhinavagupta’s Anuttara Trika. Conversely, there is little Trika in the Pratyabhijñā,
and what is present there, following Jayaratha’s analysis, accords with the Tantric

method. At the same time, Jayaratha presents, in accord with his tradition, what must
have been Abhinavagupta’s own view, that Trika is ‘the secret of all the scripturesʼ, and
hence also by extension that of the Pratyabhijñā.

' According to Swami Lakshmanjoo (1995: 6), Maheśvara belonged to the lineage o

Śrīnātha, through whom dualist-cum-nondualist Śaivism was transmitted. However, he

offers no supporting reference for this view. Jayaratha understands Maheśvarahere to
be Śambhunātha, Abhinava’s Trika teacher, which appears to be correct. Abhinava has
already identified him with Śrīkaṇṭhain one of introductory verses at the beginning of

the PTy (intro verse 4), where he praises him as follows:

jayaty anarghamahimā vipāśitapaśuvrajaḥ |

śrīmānādyaguruḥ śaṁbhuḥ śrīkaṇṭhaḥ parameśvaraḥ |l
‘(My) first (and foremost) teacher, the venerable Śambhu, who is Śrīkaṇṭha and

the Supreme Lord and has freed a host of fettered souls from (their) fetters by his
priceless glory, is victorious.”

There is no reason to doubt that Maheśvara, whom Abhinava mentions as his

teacher below in 3/90 concerning a feature of the interaction of the phonemes within
consciousness, was Śambhunātha. Elsewhere he says that Maheśvaranātha resides in his

heart, as is commonly said about a teacher. Śiva cannot be meant here, as Abhinava says

that he taught “Entry into the Supreme Plane of Mantra’ (5/97 (96cd-97ab)). This is a

practice taught in the Triśirobhairava, a Trika Tantra in which Śambhunātha instructed
Abhinava. Yet we must be careful of identifyīng Maheśvara with Śambhunātha in all

cases. Thus, he certainly was not the Maheśvara Abhinava says taught the

Śarvajñānottara (4/248ab), which, as a Siddhāntāgama, could only have been taught by

Siva Himself.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

(Saying that Śrīkaṇṭha) is ‘the one (unique) teacher” indicates that he

(was the one who originally) brought (the teachings) down (to earth).”
(Abhinava) has elsewhere called ‘Maheśvara’ Parameśa and Īśa, (referring to
him in these ways) as (his) teacher of both the lineages (matṭhikā) of the

Śrīṣantati and the one called Ardhatraiyambikā. As he said:

'" Iṭ is clear from the following reference that Bhūtirāja initīated Abhinava’s father:

‘Cukhulaka, devoted to the path of Śiva, the darkṇness of whose existence in bondage
was completely dispelled by the rays of the teachings of Śiva that arose from the lips of

Bhūtirāja IPVv vol. 3, p. 405 v. 1). Accordingly, Abhinava mentions Bhūtirāja at the

beginning of the MVV (1/6) just after his father (there called Cukhala):

‘May the glorious, high-minded Bhūtirāja who (being my father’s teacher) is

even higher than him, surpasses all, he whose zeal is directed towards raising the

community of devotees (out of sarṣāra).’ (Translation by Hanneder)

Abhinava quotes a line from Bhūtirāja in the TSā (p. 30), in which he explains
the nature of Kālī in typical Krama fashion (yad āhur bhūtirājaguravaḥ kṣepāj jñānāc
ca kālī kalanavaśatayātha). It would appear therefore that Bhūti ija was one of
Abhinava’s Krama teachers. Bhūtīrāja is again venerated as Śrīkaṇṭha below in
30/120cd-121ab, and so placed again at the same level as Maheśvara, who is

Śambhunātha, Abhinava’s Trika teacher. In other words, Abhinava is placing the Krama
teachings he received from Bhūtirāja on the same level as the Trika, both of which are
ultimately Śrīkaṇṭha’s teachings. See following note.

'" Thus, Śrīkaṇṭha is a name of Śiva as both deity and teacher, credited by Jayaratha
with the founding of Śaivism. At his command, the founders of the three forms of
aivism came down to earth (36/11cd-14ab). We have seen that according to

Somānanda he is the form of Śiva who lives on Mount Kailāśa and teaches nondualist

Śaivism (ŚDr 7/107-111; 1, n 167). As deity, at the beginning of a cosmic cycle he

arouses Nature to generate the lower creation (9/225-226). He is also said to emit it
himself (6/150ab (6/149)), and those who have mastered the lower scriptures into it
(6/153ab (6/152)). He governs the hell worlds (8/31cd-32ab), and is an aspect (aṁśa) of
Śiva (8/46). He initiates and thereby liberates those who are in Rudra’s world at the
summit of the cosmic Egg of Brahmā (8/159ab-159cd (8/158cd-159ab)) and he presides
over the Rudras outside it (8/182ab-184ab (8/181cd-183)). In his supreme form, he is
Śiva as Umā's spouse (pati) (8/239ab-241cd (8/238-241ab)). He is the deity who utters
the Māṅgala Tantra (5/40), and gave his name to the Śrīkaṇṭhīyasaṁhitā (also called

'”: The lineage founded by Śrīnātha, called Śrāsantaṁi, taught dualiṣṭ-cum-nonḍualist
Śaivism, and that of Āmardaka, the dualist form (see above, TĀv ad 1/7 below,
4/265cd-267ab and 36/11-14). Abhinava refers to Śambhunātha, who was his Trika
teacher, as belonging to the lineage of Traiyambika (6/88cd-89ab), presumably meaning
that he belonged to that part of the lineage that came down through Tryambaka’s

daughter. Below Abhinava declares that his teacher in the lineage of Śrīnātha was the

son of Bhūtirāja (37/60cd-61ab (60)), and that the Tantrāloka contains the essence of
the teachings of all these orders (below, 36/15). Here Jayaratha is saying that

Abhinava’s Trika teacher was also his teacher of the Śrīsantati. However, below

Abhinava contrasts Śambhunātha’s teaching with that of his teacher of the lineage of
Śrīnātha (6/88cd-90ab), and so they cannot be the same. We must conclude that
Jayaratha is mistaken here.

'” Jayaratha introduces this verse by saying simply ‘yadāha’ — ‘as he saidʼ. If he is

quoting Abhinava, one would expect Jayaratha to refer to him with special deference.

However, it is clear that this is not always so. In TĀv 1/13, Jayaratha introduces a

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The venerable sequence of the emergence of the Siddhas begins with

1) Bhaṭṭārikā and ends with Bhūti.' 2) The sequence of the emergence of
citation that is most certainly from a work by Abhinava simply with the words ‘yad
uktaṃ anenaiva’ ‘as this very (person i.e. Abhinavagupta) himself has said’. Judging

from the contents of the citation here, it seems very likely that it is drawn from one of

Abhinava’s works. Could this be his lost (Śrīpūrvapañcikā (quoted below in comm. on
23/75 and PTv p. 23 and 57), of which this is one of the introdi
(maṅgalaśloka)? This work is said to have been a commentary on the Māli
or part of it, as is the Mālinīvijayavārtika (short for Mālinīvijayottaraślokā
Commentary on the (first) verse of the Mālinīvijayottara).

'" A verse quoted further ahead states that Bhatṭārikā founded a Krama lineage that

ends with Bhūtirāja, who was one of Abhinava’s Krama teachers (see below, TĀv ad
4/173ab). We may take Bhaṭṭārikā to be Maṅgalā, a form of the goddess Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī
who revealed the Krama teachings to Śivānanda (alias Jñānanetra), the earthly founder
of the Krama system taught by the Kashmiri masters (Sanderson 2005b 125 n. 91). If so,
the first lineage is Krama. Abhinava refers to two teachings he received from Bhūtirāja

in the Tantrāloka. One is the Brahmāvidyā, which liberates a person who is about to die

(30/62cd-64ab). The other is a series of three Vidyās that liberate the initiate who recites
them when he is about to die (30/106-120ab). Jayaratha notes that these are not Krama

teachings, but does not question that this is the same Bhūtirāja, although he does
question that he was really one of Abhinava’s Krama teachers (see below, TĀv ad

4/173ab). Further ahead, Abhinava praises him as an incarnation of Śiva (30/62cd-64ab)

and, as he does here, as ‘Śrīkaṇṭha in a human body (30/120cd-121ab). So it is not
impossible that he is the same Bhūtirāja who was amongst those who taught him Krama.
Abhinava also refers to the son of Bhūtirāja, from whom he took initiation. He says that
he was like a sun for him in the sky of the spiritual lineage of Śrīnātha (37/61ab
(37/60)). In this case we may understand Śrīnātha to be Śivānanda (i.e., Jñānanetra),

who introduced the Krama system in Kashmir and is referred to in places as ‘Śrīnātha’.

Sanderson (2006b 110 ff) presents strong positive evidence that Bhūtirāja did in fact
belong to the Krama lineage. If he is the same Bhūtirāja who was the father of
Bhaṭṭendurāja, who taught Abhinava the traditional teaching (āmnāya) concerning the

meaning of the Gītā (intro. verse 6), he appeared practically at the start of Abhinava’s
career. Abhinava praises him as his teacher in the concluding verses of his commentary

on the Bhagavadgītā (2002: 366). There he tells us that he was the son of the Brahmin

Sauśaka, who was descendent of a certain Kātyāyana. He presents him as one who, like

the sun, removed the darkness of all people (sarvaloka) who had fallen into it. He is
praised in other words as a popular teacher who inspired many, however, he does not
refer to him as a teacher of a secret tradition or as one who enlightened him. But this

may only seemingly be so. Abhinava believed that the fundamental secret of the Gītā is

that Kṛṣṇa transmitted the ultimate state of the Krama to Arjuna. We know this because
Maheśvarānanda, who states this view, appeals to the authority of Abhinava to sustain
it, quoting a length passage in verse from his Kramakeli that paraphrases and rewrites

several verses from the Gītā (MM v. 70, p. 177). It is quite possible that he learnt this
Krama view from Bhūtirāja. Again, Abhinava clearly locates him in the line of Krama
teachers in a passage Jayaratha himself quotes above (see comm. and notes on verse
1/9). Abhinava quotes him in his Tantrasāra (p. 30) in relation to two of the meanings

of the root kal, from which the name Kālī is derived (cf. below, 3/252). This is a Krama

topic. Maheśvarānanda quotes him in the context of explaining that the nature of the
Goddess is identical with Mantra, which engulfs everything into itself. Just after, he

quotes the Kramakeli, and the verse from the Kramastotra of which it is a commentary,

as saying the same (MM p. 122). Finally, Sanderson presents some passages from the


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Śrīṣantāna begins with Bhaṭṭa and ends with Parameśa.” 3) The supreme
lineage of teachers (gurukrama) begins with the venerable Bhatṭa and ends with

Īśa." May the Trika teaching (trikārtha)' in three forms (trikarūpa) develop
my inner (spiritually intuitive) intellect (dhī).

(The statement that Maheśvara and Bhūtirāja are each) ‘another
of His
formsʼ indicates that both (teachers) are made of the Lord’s (empowe
ring)

command.'” According to the rule (aīti) stated further ahead, namely, that ‘a

teacher (of a particular scripture) is said to be (only) one who has been
authorized (adhikṛta) (to teach only that particular) scripture,” the teachers of

other orders (maṭhikā) are not teachers of Trika doctrine (trikārtha), and so they
are not saluted here; even so (as Kalatṭṭa says):

Svabodhasiddhi, which may well be a Krama work, and the colophons of which state

that it is by Śrībhaṭṭa Bhūti, who may be Bhūtirāja (Sanderson 2006b: 113 ff.).

'" The Śrīsantāna (also called Śrīsaṇtati) is identified by Jayaratha (above, comm. on
1/7) with the lineage founded by the Śrīnātha who taught dualist Śaiviṣm.

'" The supreme lineage from Abhinava’s point of view can only be Trika. Thus, in this

case ‘bhaṭṭā’ may be Sumati, who is the founder of the lineage of his Trika teacher
Śambhunātha. Note that Jayaratha says that Parameśa and Īśa are two names
for the
same teacher who taught Abhinava the traditions of both the Śrīsantati and Trika.
The
following references, drawn from the concluding verses of the PTv, may, as
Gnoli
understands it, be a reference to Śiva (who is also called Śambhu) or, as Sanderso
n
maintains (which is much more likeḷy,) to Śambhunātha, Abhinava’s Trika teacher.
If
s0, he was also called Parameśvara, a synonym of Parameśa.

‘Parameśvara, who has the heart of a teacher intent on the grace (kṛpā) of
elevating those who are devoted (prapanna) to him, he who is the venerable god

Śambhu, who has conjoined me to this degree to (ultimate) reality.” PTv p. 281-282
(concluding verses 18).

Similarly, at the beginning of the same work Abhinava writes:


‘My foremost (ādya) teacher, the venerable Śambhu who is Śṛīkaṇṭha, the
Supreme Lord (parameśvara), whose glory is priceless and has unbound the mass of
(my) fetters, is victorious! (ibid. intro. verse 4). Cf. below 1/20 and note 330.

'” Read with MSs K, J, Jh, and T trikārtho for trikārthe.

'” See below, note 220 to intro. to 1/17 concerning the term ‘ṛrikārtha’ to denote the

Trika teaching, and the word ‘artha’ in the technical sense of ‘teaching or ‘system’.
MSs K, J, Jh and T read rrikārtho for trikārthe. If we accept that reading, the meaning

would be: “May the teachings of the Trika (trikārtha), which has (this) triple
form
(trikarūpa), develop my inner (spiritual) intellect (dhī).’ If ṭhis is the correct reading, the

sense would be that the Trika teachings have this triple form as the teachings of the
Krama, dualist Śaiviṣm and Trika itself. In other words, Abhinava’s Trika system

(trikārtha) extends to include the Krama as well as dualist Śaiviṣm.

'” Read with MSs Ch, J. Jh, ṄÑ T and Ḍ, -bhagavadādeśa- for —bhagavadāveśa- (i.e.,
the Lord's penetrative absorption (āveśa)). The accepted reading makes good sense in

terms of what Jayaratha goes on to say, namely, that true teachers are given authority to
teach by their teachers. This authorization is the teacher’s empowering command

' Below, 13/350cd.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘l, who have been the disciple of all, am not poor in the teachings."

As the author of this book, in accord with this view, (possesses) within
himself the teaching of (many) teachers (gathered from) everywhere, and
expounds a great abundance (and variety) of knowledge, what his book also
makes known is like a compendium (sarṁgraha) of the essence of all the (Śaiva)
disciplines (śāstra). As he will say:

‘Having extracted' (and absorbed) the juice (rasa) (of the aesthetic

delight) which is the essence of the current of (these) three and a half lineages,
this (our work), the Tantrāloka, oozes with all the juices (rasa) (of aesthetic

sentiment).

Although (by declaring that) ‘the ancient teachers triumph’, (the
author has) saluted (all the teachers) in general, (however, just) as the ancillaries
of Yoga (yogāṅga) are common (to all yogic practice), even so it is said that

‘(Sound discriminating) reasoning (tarka) is the most excellent ancillary of

' Kallaṭa concludes his gloss (vrtti) of the SpKā with this verse. Abhinava quotes the
complete verse below in 13/344. It says: ‘I, who have had (many) teachers from Tapana
t0 Moṭaka and have been the disciple of all, am not poor in the teachings.’ By saying

that he has learnt ‘from Tapana to Moṭaka, Kallaṭa means that he has learnt whatever
he could from anybody who could teach him anything of value for him, regardless of the
tradition to which he may have belonged.

' MSs K, Ch, J, Jh, Ñ and Ḍ read -rasānvitam for -rasāhṛtim. īf we accept that

reading, the meaning would be ‘having furnished it with the juice (rasa) (of the
aesthetic delight) which is . . .

'' TĀ 36/15. Concerning rasa as nourishing juice, see below, 1/1 16ab-121cd (I/116cd-

122ab) and note 831. This is a fine example of how Abhinava is not only concerned

with a technical or philosophical exposition of the teachings. Śiva consciousness, the

one reality, is not only to be known — realised — it must also be experienced to be
beautiful, indeed as Beauty itself. The experience of metaphysical Knowledge is insight
and certainty, the experience of Beauty is sentiment. While the model of the former is

light and the sense of sight, the model of the latter is taste and the sense of taste. We
‘savour’ or ‘relishī’ Beauty, just as we ‘see’ Reality. Sentiment is the reflective
awareness of Beauty. Insight is the reflective awareness of Truth. Sentiment and insight

are the underpinnings of experience just as Beauty and Truth are, as it were, the form
and substance of Reality. Thus, if Tantrāloka is to serve as a guide to Reality, it too
must be resonant with both sentiment and insight.

' The common translation of the term ‘yogāṅga’ is ‘limbs of Yoga’. Some scholars
prefer to translate the term ‘aṅga’ not as ‘limbʼ, but as ‘ancillary° or ‘auxiliary .

Somadeva (2004: 365 n. 1) explains: ‘Sanderson has shown that it is this technical usage

of the term aṅga, denoting a secondary factor necessary for the accomplishment of the

principal, derived from the terminology of the Mīmāṁṣā (cf. Śabarabhāṣya 6/3/41,
12/3/16, Nyāyaramṇamāḷā Aṅganirṇaya 1/4; Bṛhatī p. 3), which is intended by Bhoja at
Rājamārtaṇḍa on YSū 2/29 and Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha (cf. Mrgendratantravṛtti at yogapada
1/13). The sense of the term Yoga viewed in this perspective is thus not the practice of
Yoga as a means, but ‘yoga’ as the condition which is the goal that is attained, or at
least, the process that leads to it as such. In that perspective, the aṅgas are not ‘limbs’ or

‘parts’ of Yoga, but its auxiliaries. Even s0, in some contexts the translation in common

practice may be more appropriate. In the many kinds ofyoga, the ‘ancillaries’ or ‘limbs”

are commonly understood to follow on from one another as phases or stages of the one
praxis of which the goal is yoga, and is itself the process of attaining perfection in that
yoga and so is also yoga. See below, 4/86 and note.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Yoga’. (Thus,) in accord with this teaching, those who practice and explain

sound discriminating reasoning (tarka), which is intent on bringing about

the

recognition' that the Lord (śvara) is one’s own Self that is self-luminous and
the supreme goal, should be saluted above all. Thus, in order to contemplate
again (his) teacher, grand-teacher and great-grand-teacher as those who have
prepared him for this particular (purpose in a special way)
(viṣeśaprayojakīkāreṇa), he says:

JHī--zārrrTgrdftgaT: 1|

TGPTITṬGS TGGĪĪTR̄Ī : || Ḷ2 1|
śrīsomānandabodhaśrīmadutpalaviniḥsṛtāḥ |
jayanīi saṁvidāmodasandarbhā dikprasarpiṇaḥ || 10 |
tadāsvādabharāveśabṛṁhitāṁ matiṣaṭpadīm |
guror lakṣmaṇaguptasya nādasaṅmohinīṁ numaḥ || 11 I]
(The collections of fragrances (delighting) consciousness that come

forth from a beautiful blue lotus (utpala)'™ by (its) blossoming with the joy

of the (shining) moon which is beauty (itself), and spread in (all) directions,
excel (all). In the same way,) the compositions (inspired by) the bliss of

consciousness, that have come forth from the venerable (śrīmar)
Utpala(deva) by virtue of (his) awakening by the illustrious Somānanda,
and have spread in (all) directions, excel (all).
' MV 17/18b. This line is also quoted below ad 4/18cd-19ab. The context, MV 17/1819, quoted by Abhinava in 4/15-16. There and in the following verses, he deals

extensively with the nature and application of discriminating intuitive reasoning

(tarka)

as the primary foundation of the practice of the Empowered Means. It both discerns the
highest goals taught in the scriptures when operating for oneself and is the primary

qualifying attribute of a true teacher when operating for others. See below, 4/13 ff.

' Instead of -pratyabhijñāpanaparasya (‘intent on bringing about recognition’), MSs
Ch, J, N T and Ḍ read -pratyabhijñānaparasya (and MS K —pratyabhijñāparasya,

which means the same, that is, ‘intent on recognitionʼ).

'" Hanneder translates the word utpala as ‘water-lly°, which is indeed one of the

meanings of the word. However, another is ‘blue lotus’, which seems to be more
appropriate, as blue lotuses blossom at night by the light of the moon.
'“ Hanneder suggests that the reading here is ‘suspiciousʼ, as ‘the ceasure is inelegant as
it splits ‘śrīmar and ‘the wording of the TĀ is not secured by the commentary.” (1998:
133 note 28).

' This verse is MVV 1/7. Read as we find there and the metre demands —sañbodha-

for -hodha-.

' There is a play on words here. The compound sarvidāmodasandarbhā means a)

‘compositions (inspired by) the bliss of consciousnessʼ, and b) ‘collections of fragrance
s
(that
delight)
consciousnessʼ.
The
compound
śrīsomānandasaṁbodhaśrīmadutpalaniḥsr̥uāḥ means a) (compositions) that have
come
forth from the venerable Utpala(deva) by virtue of (his) awakening by the illuṣtriou
s

TANTRĀLOKA

We salute the bee-like mind of the teacher Lakṣmaṇagupta, whose

sound is the attractive (resonance of consciousness) intensified by (his)
penetration (āveśa) into the copious relish of that (Lotus, his teacher
Utpaladeva).”
Now, (it is said that:) ‘a spiritual teacher (ācārya) is ten times (greater)

than a (common) teacher (upādhyāya), and a father is (equal to) a hundred

spiritual teachers.” Thus, in accord with this dictum, because the recollection

(of a father) is of greater importance than even that of his teacher,
(Abhinavagupta) reflects on his own father, by way of (seeking his) blessing.

Ẽ UIEtIĒEḺ ĀE-EÁIEIṬIIHṈ
a fragoaī fczaṁcz ī īṛēēūā: |I 23I
yaḥ pūrṇānandaviśrāntaḥ” sarvaśāstrārthapāragaḥ |

sa śrīcukhulako diśyād iṣṭaṁ me gurur uttamaḥ || 12 ||
May the venerable Cukhulaka, the best of teachers who has crossed

over (and mastered) the purport of all the disciplines (śāstra) and rests in

perfect bliss, instruct me in what (I) desire (to learn).

Somānanda, and b) ‘(fragrances) that come forth from a blue lotus (utpala) by (its)
blossoming with the joy of the (shining) moon which is beauty (itself).

'! We have seen that Somānanda was the first to write on the nondualist Śaiva

philosophy that developed, in the hands of his disciple Utpaladeva, into the

Pratyabhijñā. The fragrance of these teachings emanating from Utpaladeva ~ the God of
the Lotus — attracted the bee-like mind of his disciple Lakṣmaṇagupta, who taught

Abhinavagupta Pratyabhijñā. Abhinava also praises him at the beginning of his MVV
(v. 8), and of course, at the beginning of the ĪPV.
' Manuṣmṛti 2/145ab.

Read -viśrānta for -viśrānta.
' Abhinava seeks the blessings of his father, who he expressly tells us was called both

Cukhulaka (or, variously, Cukhula, Cukhala, and Cukhalaka — which is the reading here
in MSs J, N, and Ḍ) as well as Narasiṁhagupta, revering him as ‘shining brightly by
virtue of his immersion in the essence of the scriptures’ʼ, and as being graced with great

devotion for Śiva (below 37/54, cf. above, TĀv ad 1/1). Abhinava’s father gave him his

basic knowledge of Sanskrit and taught him grammar, literature and logic (nyāya).

Abhinava’s mother, whom he recalls with great love, died when he was young (below
37/56). It seems that his father died when Abhinava was in his youth, and, liberated,
‘rests in perfect bliss’. He says of him: ‘I adore (my father), a scholar whose name is
Cukhala and who is more venerable than even the teachers. It is through his education
(saṁsṣkāra), that I have become free from attachment.’ (MVV 1/5) The translation is by

Hanneder who reflects on what may be meant by the word ‘saṁṅskāra’ here, settling for
the meaning ‘education’ (Hanneder 1998: 131-132). While this a possible translation,
the term commonly refers to the Vedic rites of passage which are forms of initiation,
and so may be applied to Śaiva initiaton. The latter is not likely, as Abhinava is
normally careful to acknowledge his teachers and what they have given him, and does

not say anywhere that his father initiated him into any form of Śaivism. However, there
is no reason to reject out of hand the first, most literal meaning. The rites of passage are
common to followers of all paths. They are normally sponsored by the father, and if he


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘Cukhulaka’ is another name (of Abhinavagupta’s) father, which is

well-known in the world. He is ‘the best of teachers’. The reason for (his)

excellence is that the recollection (of a father) is of greater importance than
(even) that of a spiritual teacher. Thus, it is said elsewhere also: “The father (of

Abhinavagupta,) who is called Cukhula, is more venerable than even (his)

teachers.”

After having directed (our) attention in this way to the teachers who are

(more) proximate to the Tantra modality (tantraprakriyā), he exults (his)
teacher of the Kula modality as the place where (he found ultimate) rest.
is a capable and authorized Brahmin, may even be administered directly by him. Unlike

the Śaiva and other such initiations, these are not a matter of personal choice. As the son

of a Brahmin, and to be one, Abhinavagupta would have had to receive them. Their
Vedic character is irrelevant to Abhinava’s or indeed his father’s personal convictions.
Although the word may well also be taken to mean ‘education’ in a general sense, this
meaning does not necessarily preclude the other one.

! MVV 1/5ab. In the place of janakaṁ chukulābhidham — Ś‘the father (of
Abhinavagupta) who is called Cukhula’, the edition of the MVV reads yuktaṁ
Śśrīcukhalābhidham, which Hanneder translates as ‘a scholar whose name is the
venerable Cukhala’. The word ‘yuktaṁ’, which Hanneder takes to mean ‘abhiyuktaṁ’ ,
i.e., diligent or well versed, implies, according to him, that Cukhala/Cukhula was a

scholar. We know that this is true; even so the expression can equally well mean that he

was diligently attentive to the Deity, which we may presume was Śiva. Indeed, this is
how Abhinava describes him, when at the end of the PTv (concluding verses 12cd) he
praises ‘the one called Cukhala, whose mind, solely (intent on) Śiva (śivaikacitta), was
averse to the story (vrttānta) of the world of transmigratory existence.’

““ Note here that Jayaratha distinguishes Pratyabhijñā from Trika on the basis that the

former belongs to the Tantra modality and the latter the Kula one. Trika, as we have
noted already, contains both modalities. The teachings of the Pratyabhijñā belong
entirely to the Tantrīc modality. Any school, or even just a single Tantra, can be
classified from this perspective. Thus, the teachings of Siddhānta systems would
normally be entirely in the Tantric modality. The Krama teachings are entirely in the
Kula modality. One may well ask in that case what remains then of Kula as a separate

‘systemʼ in the Kashmiri Śaiva context? One wonders, therefore, whether it is right to
think, as many scholars do, that Kula is a separate system (along with Krama,
Pratyabhijñā, Spanda and Trika) which forms a part of the syncretic whole we nowadays
call Kashmiri Saivism or even Trika. The answer to this question, I believe, is implicitly
supplied by Abhinava himself by the sequence in which he presents the teachers whom

he acknowledges as contributing to the existence of the Anuttara Trika he expounds and
his knowledge of it. These are 1) Matsyendranātha, who brought the Kula teachings into

the world. 2) Tryambakāditya, who revealed nondualist

Saivism, and the teachers

associated with him, who revealed the other two forms of Śaiva teachings, dualist and
dualist-um-nondualist. They constituted a triad (trika) who presumably taught the

Tantric modality. To these another is added which said to be a ‘half’ because it was
started by a woman, namely, 3) Tryambika’s daughter, which is Trika proper. This
contains the Kula modality also. Abhinava declares that his Tantrāloka oozes the nectar
of these schools. He then continues to praise the teachers of the Tryambika lineage, that

is, those of the Pratyabhijñā, in chronological order: Somānanda, followed by
Utpaladeva and then Lakṣmaṇagupta. We may pause here to observe that Abhinavya is
referring to these teachers in order of precedence as the founders of the more general,

pervasive forms of the teaching, and then specifically as the particular teachers who
founded specific lineages that came down to him. Thus, Matsyendranātha’s Kaulism is

TANTRĀLOKA

√TTTNT
T JITTI T: |
T-ālṣ% T̄ĨTST̄ JTTRHTĪ: 1| 23 11
jayatāj jagaduddhṛtikṣamo ʻsau
bhagavatyā saha śambhunātha ekaḥ |
yad udīritaśāsanāṁśubhir me
prakaṭo ʻyaṁ gahano ‘pi śāstramārgaḥ || 13 |I
May Śambhunātha who, together with Bhagavatī (his consort), is
the (only) one capable of extricating the (entire) universe (from ignorance),
be victorious! Although profound (and hard to grasp), it is he who has
made this path of the scriptures (śāstra) clear to me by the (enlightening)

rays of the teachings he has spoken (to me).

conceived to be an original pervasive presence, which is indeed how it is described (see

above, verse 7 and notes). Thus, just as the philosophy of the Pratyabhijñā is clearly
apparent throughout the Tantrāloka, by direct reference as much as ‘pervasive
presence’, so too is Kaulism. In this respect it could be thought to be a component
‘system’, but it is one which is entirely different in character from the Pratyabhijñā

which can be very clearly defined by reference to its specific texts. This is not so with

the Kaulism of the Tantrāloka. Only a few works, all of which are Tantras, are

attributed to Matsyendranātha. Nonetheless, Abhinava places Matsyendranātha at the
head of the list of his most venerated teachers, suggesting that his Kaula teachings
inform, in various ways and degrees, the teachings of Anuttara Trika taught in the
Tantrāloka. Numerous passages containing Kula teachings may indeed be identified in
the Tantrāloka and related works, but these are always related in some way to a
particular school that conveys them. One of them is Anuttara Trika itself.

Abhinava refers to Śambhunātha in several places in his Tantrāloka, both generally

as his Trika teacher and also as imparting particular teachings. In this, the culmination
of the first phase of his career, in which his primary concern is Trika Śaivism,
Abhinavagupta perceives himself to be an enlightened being, both because he was born

from enlightened parents first of all, and then especially by virtue of the Trika teachings
and grace of Śambhunātha, his Trika master. He venerates his other teachers, but it is
only Śambhunātha who made the path of the Trika teaching clear to him so that he could
travel down it swiftly by attending to the spiritual and intellectual knowledge
transmitted to him by Śambhunātha and his consort (1/16). Flowing from their lotus

feet, radiant with the rays of the light of illuminating grace, they made the lotus of his
heart bloom with the full and unrestricted expansion of liberated consciousness (1/21).

Thus Śambhunātha, who was Abhinava’s sole (eka) Trika teacher, was most unique
(eka) amongst all his teachers. By learning Trika from him, he reached the highest level

of realisation possible. He received thereby the secret which is the essence and

culmination of all the Śaivāgama; indeed every teaching understood to be just stages on
the way to that supreme attainment.
In this way also Śambhunātha was his sole teacher,

because pi teaching him Trika and initiating him into it, he had taught everything.
ambhunātha was Abhinava’s Trika teacher, to whom Abhinava repeatedly
refers throughout the Tantrāloka as the source of this or that teaching. He has a very
special respect for him and is especially grateful to him. Thus, the serial order in which


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


(Śambhunātha’s) Tantric consort (dūtī) is called Bhagavatī. One has no
authority anywhere (to perform any) ritual in the Kula modality without a
consort. Therefore (it is normal) to take an oath of companionship (with a

consort).

‘The attainment (siddhi) of fearful men that is said (to be achieved) here

after a year, is achieved with women who are established in reality in (just)

twelve days. Therefore, taking a beautiful woman with fine features (subhagā),

with a nature that is steeped in virtue (bhāvitāśaya), one should worship,

(make a) sacrifice and offerings to the fire.’
By (saying that) ‘the path of the scriptures’ has become (clear, that is)

free of (the impeding) impurity (of ignorance) (vimala), (Abhinava) has thereby
also declared that (Śambhunātha) explained the (śaiva) tradition (āgama)
headed by Trika (to him). As (Abhinavagupta) himself has said:
‘Having correctly (samyak) understood the traditional teaching (āgama)

from the mouth of the venerable Śambhunātha, the great repository of all the

he praises his teachers here appears to be guided by a principle of gradation of the
systems that contribute to the Trika he expounds here, from generic to more specific.
Accordingly, he praises Śambhunātha last, not as the least of his teachers, but as the
greatest one who taught him, specifically, Trika Śaivism, and therefore must have
initiated him into it. Indeed, he dedicates two more verses of praise to him here (1/16
and 1/21). He is the only teacher he praises at the beginning of his summary of the
Tantrāloka, the Tantrasāra. There he repeats the concluding verse in this series (i.e. 21).
In his MVV (1/2-4) Abhinava praises him first of all in the following verses, where he
again refers to the knowledge he imparted to him as rays of light:
‘May (my) teacher surpass all who, with the rays of his (awakened)

consciousness pouring forth all around, makes the lotus of my heart blossom, (and) who
entrusted me with the currents of doctrine (arthaugha) that are dedicated to destroying

the distress (of sañsāra). (These doctrines) are radiating like (jewels) in the five streams

(of Śaiva revelation), which have as their aim the Half of Six (i.e. Trika) (that are
formed by the five streams) together with its reflective awareness. May (this teacher),
Śambhunātha, who was purified by (his teacher), the glorious Sumati, and is favourable
towards true devotees, be pleased with me and satisfied with this (offering of the)

flowers of (my) words.”
'”! Venerated here along with his consort, Śambhunātha is portrayed as the acme of a
Kula teacher. Although Matsyendranātha, the first Kula teacher of this Age, is not

referred to here by Abhinava along with his consort, when the Kula teachers of the four
Ages are worshipped in the Gurumaṇḍala at the outset of Trika Kula practice, special
care is taken to mention and worship their consorts also (see below 29/29cd-33ab). The
same is the case with the Krama teachers, not mentioned here by Abhinava (see below
intro. to comm. on 29/43). AIl these are Kula teachers who teach Kaula practice which
involves, symbolically at least, the offering and consumption of meat, wine, and sexual

fluids. The point Abhinava is implicitly making is that Kula practice reaches its peak of
excellence with Trika. This is because it most effectively gives rise to the fully

expanded state of liberated consciousness, whether such rites are literally done

externally or just symbolically and inwardly.
! MSs N T and Ḍ svarūpāṁ for sarūpāṁ, which can also mean ‘of a common nature

with oneself’

TANTRĀLOKA

scriptures, this is the extensive commentary (vivṛtti) I have written on this

treatise which says profound (things) and is beautiful with the (unbroken) flow
(saṁtati) of the savour (rasa) (of aesthetic delight) of the secret (teachings).”

Now, in the course of declaring what he is doing, the purpose
(prayojana) (of it) and the rest, the author declares the reason (for writing) the
book.
The Purpose of the Book and its Inspiration

3TTāNTgīiṁ
dPīT? ēērd 11 2: 1
santi paddhatayaś citrāḥ srotobhedeṣu bhiyasā |
anuttaraṣaḍardhārthakrame tv ekāpi nekṣyate || 14 ||
Many and various are the liturgical manuals (paddhati) (in use) in
the diverse currents (of scripture) (srotas).™ But there is not even one to be

seen for the procedures (krama) of the Anuttara Trika.

One could also translate ‘. . . beautiful with (the traditional teachings) of the lineage
(saṁtati) (that transmits) the savour (rasa) (of the aesthetic delight) of the secret
(teachings).”

The source of this reference has not been traced. It looks like a standard verse

that comes at the beginning or end of a treatise praising the teacher. Without the source,
we can only conjecture what this commentary was. He refers to his commentary as a

vivrtti. Itis possible that he was commenting on a previous commentary. This is the case

with his well-known vivṛtivimarśinī on the ĪP, that comments on Utpaladeva’s vṛtti as
well as ṭikkā on his own Jśvarapratyabhijñākārikā. This verse is not found there. Nor

would we expect it to be. Here Abhinava is acknowledging Śambhunātha as his teacher,
and says that it contained ‘secret teachings’ and so was certainly a commentary on a
Trika work. Was this his lost commentary on the MV or some lectio thereof called
(Śrīpūrva-) Pañjikā? (See Appendix volume concerning sources under that entry).

This remark directs our attention to the existence in Abhinava’s time (i.e.

the

eleventh century) of liturgical manuals (paddhati). The language of the Tantras is often

terse, and the many and diverse rituals they teach are generally described in an
abbreviated form. They often just state what is to be done, not how, and the mantras

required are often given in code. Without a teacher who knows the ritual procedure, it

requires time, reflection and knowledge to work it out, even if there is sufficient data to
do so. It is not surprising therefore that liturgical manuals came to be compiled that
prescribe in detail how the rituals are to be performed, so that all that is required is to

follow their instructions without needing to refer to the original Tantras from which they
draw. Rāmakaṇṭha (who was an older contemporary of Abhinava) defines the nature of
a paddhati accordingly in his commentary (vṛtti) on the Sārdhatriśatikālottara (ad

4/1cd-2ab) as follows:

‘For any scripture a Paddhati is a text which enables the performance of the

rituals [of that scripture] along with the Mantras [that accompany them] by succinctly
arranging in the order [of performance] (a) the [instructions] explicitly stated [in the
scripture but] dispersed in various places [throughout its length], and (b) whatever else

those explicit statements imply. An example is the Yajñasūtra in the case of the


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Yajurveda.’ Translation and edition by Sanderson (Heidelberg handout 2003 p. 2 also
2005b: 106 n 491).
This came to be such common and extensive practice that nowadays

such

works constitute by far the greatest bulk of Tantric manuscripts. While the great

majority were and are of importance to just a small group of practitioners at any given
time and place, some are major influential works. However, very few early paddhatis

composed prior to the 13th century have survived. Sanderson (ibid. p. 1) informs us that
the Naimittikakarmānusandhāna of Brahmaśambhu of Mālava composed in AD 938

(Asiatic Society of Bengal MS G 4767) is the oldest surviving paddhati. The
Siddhāntasārapaddáhati by king Bhojadeva (reign 1018-1060) (NAK 1/1363 = NGMPP
B 28/29), the Kriyāsaṅgrahapaddhati by Vāladhārin (Kathmandu Kaiser Library,
MS
63 = NGMPP C 5/3 manuscript completed in AD 1091/2), and the Jñānaratnāvalī
by

Jñānaśiva, (probably a South Indian) Siddhāntin living in Beṇares in the second half of
the 12th century (IFI MS T 231), are three other unpublished padáhatiṣ. Theṣe are not
very big works. The Kriyākramadyotika ‘Illumining Light of Ritual Procedureʼ, by
the
12 century South Indian Siddhāntin Aghoraśivācārya is, on the contrary, such
an
extensive and thorough manual that it still guides the rituals in the majority of the
large

Śaiva temples of South India. It draws from Karmakāṇḍakramāvalī (also called

Somaśambhupaddhati), composed around 1095 AD by Somaśambhu, who was probably
from Kashmir. These are the only early paddhatis so far discovered.
From what Abhinava says here, it would seem there were already many and
various liturgical manuals in 11" century Kashmir. Buṭ either they were not as popular

as they came to be later on, or with the continuous changes that there must have been, as
there still are, in ritual procedure and their limited spread outside the circles of initiates
of individual teachers, they were not copied. The earliest commentators on the
Siddhānta Āgamas, who preceded Abhinavagupta, mention the names of a
few

padáhatis and even quote from them. Abhinava himself refers to them in one or
two
places. For example, he cites the Karmapaddhati by Dharmaśiva (below 21/50-56
ab)
and that of a certain Īśānaśiva (below 22/28c-31b) (who should not be confused with
a
later homonymous South Indian author of an extensive paddhati that bears
his name).
The ending ‘-śiva’, of these names, indicates that they were Siddhāntins. In
this case, as

in many others, we observe that Abhinava is not averse to drawing from sources that
belong to dualist, more public, Śaivism. In this respect he follows the normal practice of

drawing ritual procedures from a variety of sources, where deemed appropria
te, whilst
maintaining his focus on the ritual practice of his favoured traditions. Amongst
paddhatiṣ we know that predate Abhinava but are not mentioned by him is one based
on
the Saiddhāntika Kāloṭtara composed by Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha, father of Rāmakaṇṭha
who
refers to it in his commentary on the Sārdhatriśatikālottara (see Sanderson
2007: 244-5
for this and other later Siddhānta paddhatis also ibid. 387 ff.).
Thus, by referring to the Tantrāloka as a paddhati, Abhinava is telling us that

from this point of view at least, it is not only a liturgical work; he is also implying that it
is sufficient unto itself. There is no need to refer to the original Tantras, although he
certainly does not discourage us from doing so; indeed, he much admires those who do.
Clearly, the Tantrāloka is more than just a compendium (saṅgrahagrantha), although

Jayaratha does also refer to it ‘as a compendium of the essence of the entire Trika
teaching (comm 1/1) and, indeed, of ‘all the other (Śaiva) traditions (śāṣtra)) (comm.
1/9). Nor is it just a study of the Tantras (in which case Tantrāloka would mean
the
Light OF the Tantras) or just an explanation of them (in which case Tantrāloka would
mean Light ON the Tantras) (cf. TĀv ad 1/246ab-246cd (1/246cd-247ab))
. In
Abhinava’s view, ritual action (kriyā) does not essentially differ from knowled
ge

(jhñāna) or indeed, from yoga. There is a continuity from one to the other. When

TANTRĀLOKA

knowledge develops and the summit of yoga is attained, it turns to action (see below,
1/150). Thus, the Trika liturgy, which includes all three, is the most complete form of
practice. This is because, as we are reminded repeatedly, liturgical action, like every
other activity, including yoga, is modelled on the dynamics of perception, which is

grounded in the one all-embracing, full and complete consciousness and issues from it.

Thuṣ, he ultimately champions the complete knowledge of reality as the ultimate means,

and indeed, the goal itself: liberation (see below 1/22 and 32). We will see as we
proceed how Abhinava supports and justifies ritual as a means to liberation from various

perspectives within the context of Śaiva nondualism, even though it is action (see, for

example below, note to 1/23, note 1,465 and 4/256 ff.).
In short, as Sanderson (2007: 372) puts

The Tantrāloka is not a Paddhati in

the narrow sense, that is to say, a detailed practical guide to the performance of the

system's rituals. Rather it builds on the basis of the Maālinīvijayottara a theory-rich

account of the vision of the Trika's teaching of the nature of ultimate reality and the
means to realization (see below

1/17). These means include ritual, but since

Abhinavagupta held to the view, in opposition to the Saiddhāntikas, that it is knowledge
rather than ritual that lierates, he also teaches the methods that do not descend to the

level of ritual performance and rationalizes ritual itself as a process of cultivating the

insight that in his higher methods comes about through direct, nonconceptual intuition
or the gradual refinement of a conceptual awareness of ultimate reality

(vikalpasaṅṣkāra), to the point at which it transcends its conceptual character to
become immediate experience (sākṣātkāraḥ)’.

Thus, taken as a whole, the Tantrāloka contains a full program of Anuttara
Trika doctrine and practice. Certainly, it was Abhinavagupta’s intention for it to serve as
the basis for the future development of Trika Śaivism. However, although he tells us

that one of his disciples knew the rituals well, we have no evidence that the rites taught

in the Tantrāloka were extensively performed. No manuals for these rites have survived,
if they ever existed. Even Jayaratha, the commentator, who lived two centuries later,

was it seems initiated into Śrīvidyā rather than Trika. The tradition has survived in some

form to modern times, but can by no means be said to be connected through an

unbroken transmission directly to Abhinavagupta. Fortunately, in Abhinava's view,

there is ample room for those whose insight is elevated and sound to take up the
teachings, understand them correctly, and transmit them to others (cf. below 4/100 ff).

Concerning this verse, see Dyczkowski, 1988: 180. Gnoli translates ‘Trika, cioe’ la

scuola senza superioreʼ, i.e., ‘Trika, the most excellent schoolʼ, taking ‘anuttara’ to be
simply an adjective of Trika rather than a proper name. Similarly, Sanderson (2007:
391, note 530) translates ‘the procedures of the supreme doctrine of Trika’. He

acknowledges that Anuttaratrika, otherwise called Parākrama or Ekavīra, is considered
to be the system taught in the Parātrīśikā, which Abhinava expounds in his commentary

(vivaraṇa). But it seems that he wishes to distinguish it from the Trika taught in the
Tantrāloka. This is because the Trika teachings of the PT and allied texts such as the

Vijñānabhairaya do not admit the performance of outer ritual, whereas Abhinava
dedicates most of the second half of the Tantrāloka to matters of ritual. However, this
need not be so. Jayaratha considers the teaching of the Tantrāloka to be ‘the modality

(of practice) (prakriyā) of the teaching (artha) of Anuttara Trika’ (see below, comm. on

the following verse). Abhinava himself refers to the mantras of his own school as that of
the Anuttara Trika (below, 11/88), which Jayaratha glosses as being those ‘of the
teaching (artha) of Anuttara Trika’ contained in the primary Trika Tantras, that is, the
Siddhayogīśvarīmata, Anāmakatantra and Mālinīvijaya. Finally, we may note that
Swami Lakshmanjoo (1995: 7) also agrees that Abhinava meant to say that the system
he teaches in his Tantrāloka is Anuttara Trika. Thus, the PT teaches anuttaraprakriyā,

which is a name Abhinava gives to it in that there is no outer ritual. The Tantrāloka also


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Nor could it be otherwise here (in this case). Thus, in the course of

declaring his own competence, he makes known the justification for the reason
of his commitment (to do this):

ity ahaṁ bahuśaḥ sadbhiḥ śiṣyasabrahmãcãribhiḥ |
arthito racaye spaṣṭāṁ pūrṇārthāṁ prakriyām imām || 15 II
Thus, repeatedly requested by (those) virtuous people who are (my)
disciples and fellow students, I compose this treatise (prakriyā), which is

clear and complete (pāūrṇārthā).

teaches the remaining two modalities of practice, namely, Tantra and Kula prakriyā,
which do. Note that this is so, even though the teachers of the Pratyabhijñā philosophy

are considered, at least by Jayaratha, to be exponents of the former. Nonetheless,
Tantraprakriyā likē Kulaprakriyā is also a modality of ritual practice.

There is a problem here with how it would be best to translate the word ‘prakriyā’.
OŌne meaning of the word is simply ‘book° or ‘treatise’ (cf. Sanderson 2007a: 391, note

530). Indeed, this is one way that Jayaratha understands the word. Two examples
will
suffice. Commenting on 1/19, he says: ‘“we will elucidate’ (it) by means of (this) treatise
(prakriyā). (prakatkurma iti prakriyākaraṇena). Again (TĀv on 1/21): ʻHe says
that
‘requested (by (my) sincere disciples and fellows) I compose (this work), that is, the
work (prakriyā) he has promised (pratjūātā) (to write), the name (abhidhāna) of which
is Tantrāloka, in accord with what is stated further ahead (where we read): ‘Here in this
teaching called the Tantrāloka, I expound this . . . (below, 17246ca). (arthito racaye
iti
pratjñātāyāḥ prakriyāyāś ca tan mayā tantryate tantrālokanāmny atra śāsane

ityādivakṣyamāṇopajīvanena tantrāloka ity abhidhānam I) Thus ‘treatise’ is indeed one
of the meanings of the word prakriyā, and it does fit in the context of this verse.

However, Abhinava also uses the word in a different, more technical sense, as

indeed does Jayaratha. We observe this usāge in the Vijñānabhairava (14á4cd), where we
read: “O gazelle-eyed one, this external (ritual) procedure (prakriyā) is (practiced)
here
only amongst the gross (minded) (eṣātrra prakriyā bāhyā sthūleṣv eva mṛgekṣaṇe)

There can be no doubt that the sense as translated here is correct, because the VBh goes

on to describe corresponding inner forms of outer ritual as the ‘true’ and effective ones.

Clearly ‘prakriyā’ in this case means ‘procedure’, especially, but not always, just ritual
procedure. Moreover, there are a number of prakriyās, and not all or everything they
include need be ritual; and so I translate the term as 'modality (of practice)’. There can

be no doubt that this is the meaning in the following reference: ‘(Abhinavagupta

expounds) ‘this’, the modality (of practice) (prakriyā) of the teaching (artha) of
Anuttara Trika, that (he has) understood from (his) teacher’s instruction, because it is
free of doubt, error and the like. (TĀv 1/16, see also introductory statement to 1/17).

We have seen that there are two methods, procedures, or modalities of practice,

namely, Tantric and Kaula. The term for ‘method’ is prakriyā. Here, one could
understand that there is a reference here to another ‘prakriyā’, in this sense, namely that
of Anuttara Trika. Accordingly, one could translate the word as ‘liturgyʼ or ’ritual
format’. Indeed, Abhinava has just said that the Tantrāloka he is writing is a liturgy
(paddhati). But not every prakriyā is liturgical. We have noted that the use of the term
in the expression ‘anuttaraprakriyā’. This ‘prakriyā’, taught in the teachings of the

Parātrīśikā, transcends riṭual. But as the PT is a Trika Tantric text, one could hazard to

say that it forms a part of Anuttaratrikaprakriyā. No Means or Anupāya taught in

TANTRĀLOKA

JJTRṬṬTJITFTṬTGUTG-ĪTTT-

Ṁ ā-td || 2. 11|

śrībhaṭṭanāthacaraṇābjayugāt tathā śrībhaṭṭārikāṁghriyugalād guruṣantatir yā |

bodhānyapāśaviṣanuttadupāsanottha-

bodhojjvalo ‘bhinavagupta idaṁ karoti || 16 |

Abhinavagupta does this, flaming with the (awakened)
consciousness that has arisen by (devout) attendance (upāsana) to that
remedy for the poison of the fetters, namely (all) that is other than
(awakened) consciousness, which is (the teaching transmitted through
the) lineage of teachers (that has come) from the two lotus feet of the

venerable Bhaṭṭanātha and the two feet of the venerable Bhaṭṭārikā (his
consort).

‘Attendance’ to the knowledge that has come through the lineage of the
teachers is the act of repeatedly placing it in one’s mind (cetas). From that has
chapter two, is also called anuttaropāya. This can mean the ‘unexcelled means’ʼ, but it

seems more likely that the sense is ‘the means proper to Anuttara’. No Means, which

like Anuttaraprakriyā denies the necessity of outer ritual (see 2/24ab-26ab (2/24-26)),

can be taken to represent the presence of this prakriyā in the context of the one taught in

the Tantrāloka. But here it is a small token presence. Moreover, it is understood as a

‘meansʼ — an approach that Abhinava had not yet explored in his earlier work, the PT.
Finally, I should refer to Rastogi's discussion (1987: 5-7) concerning the

ambiguity of this term. Rastogi quotes from the Sanskrit lexicons, the Śahdakalpadruma
and Vācaspatyam. The former defines a ‘prakriyā’ as a section in a book which lays out
the order or sequence (krama) of its topics (i.e., an index). The latter defines it as ‘fixed

procedure (niyatavidhi). But although these definitions tend to support the technical

sense of ‘procedure’, Rastogi prefers to think that the reference to ‘prakriyā’ in this

verse is to the Tantrāloka as a type of book dealing with procedures. In deference to the
opinion of this scholar, I translate prakriyā here as ‘treatise’ (see below, note 1,323).

Nonetheless, it seems that Abhinava also meant to say that he was expounding, indeed,
constructing this, the Anuttaratrika modality of practice. The verb ‘racaye means ‘I

composeʼ, which can refer to the book he is writing. But one may equally well translate
‘racaye’ as ʻḹ construct or ‘put together’, which would support the translation of

prakriyā as ‘procedure’ (ritual and otherwise) or ‘modality° (of practice), but it may also
refer to the practice which he ‘constructs’ʼ.

As in his previous Trika works, the PTyv and MVV, Abhinava declares that he is
impelled by his disciples and others to write. At the same time, in accord with the
standard form of writing a leamed treatise (śāstra), he also states his commitment
(pratijñā) to do it and complete it. The following verse announces the source of his
authority (adhikāra) and ability (sāmarthya) to do it.

See below, 8/293ab (8/292).

Bhaṭṭanātha is Śambhunātha, who taught Abhinavagupta Trika.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘arisen the (awakened) consciousness’, which is the subject (viṣaya)
that

should be taught, namely, the direct experience (of the supreme reality); and so

is ʻflamingʼ, that is, one whose nature it is to have rightly understood (the

teachings). Being such, (Abhinavagupta expounds) ‘this’, characterized

as the

(he has) understood from (his) teacher’s instruction, because it is free of

doubt,

modality (of practice) (prakriyā) of the teaching (artha) of Anuttara Trika, that

error and the like.

Now wishing to tell it to others, he ‘doesʼ, that is, teaches (this). This is

the meaning. By mentioning the name ‘Abhinavagupta’ which is well known to

all, he has reinforced (his) authoritativeness (and that of this work). Indeed, it is

said that:
‘A teacher is (considered to be) authoritative (āpta) who has directly

experienced the nature (of the reality he is expounding) and is engaged (in

teaching) by (the sincere) desire to tell (others) of the reality (artha) (he has
seen) as he has seen it.”
He expounds what is indicated by the word ‘that’, (namely, that)
‘which is the (teaching of the) lineage of the teachers’, that is, the knowledge
taught by that (lineage) which is that of the succession of teachers and persists

without a break. This is the meaning. How is that (iineage)? He says (it is)

‘the remedy for the poison of the fetters, that is, (all) that is other than
(awakened) consciousnessʼ. He will explain (further ahead where he says):
‘A fetter is said to be whatever is other than Supreme Śiva, Whose

nature we have just described and Who is beautiful with the freedom of the

consciousness which is supreme nonduality.’

According to this teaching (nīti), a ‘fetter’ (pāśa) is whatever is ‘other
than’ supreme Śiva who is ‘(awakened) consciousnessʼ; namely, ignorance

(akhyāti), which is the perception of duality (bhedaprathā). Ī is ‘poison’

because it deludes, and that (devout attendance to the lineage) remedies

it. ‘The

venerable Bhaṭṭanātha’ is the venerable Śambhunātha (Abhinavagupta’s Trika
teacher). ‘The venerable Bhaṭṭārikā’, who is called ‘Bhagavatī’, is his consort
(dūtī). As (Abhinavagupta) himself has said:

Read sākṣātkṛtadharmo for sākṣātkṛtadharmā.

! The translation follows Jayaratha’s explanation of the word ‘upāsanā’ (which means

‘practice’ ‘atṭeṉdance to’ and ‘worship’) as the teaching of the lineage of teachers.
Lakshmanṇjoo takes it to mean the lineage of teachers itself, rather than the knowledge
passed down through it.

” Below, 8/292cd-293ab (292).

Swami Lakshmanjoo (1995: 8): ‘In reality, everything other than knowledge of Śiva

(Śivajīāna) is binding. It is a fetter. . . Thus, what the yogi must do above all, once all
things are abandoned, is to make knowledge of Śiva his goal. By means of this, he may
fully attain the state of experiencing Śiva directly.’

TANTRĀLOKA

""I praise Śambhu, the great teacher who has many (names and) titles

at the beginning and end (of his earthly names, such as

1) Bhatṭa,

Bhaṭṭārikānātha, 2) Śrīkaṇṭha, who is the visible (drṣṭa) Bhairava, 3)
Nrṣiṁha (a lion amongst men), who is united with (his consort who is) the

foundation of the (divine) energy of glory (bhūti), and (who is a spiritually)

proud (and brave) Kaula adept (vīra).

In accord with such sayings as: ‘ṭhe wise man should place (the

teaching) in a woman’s mouth and then take it again from there, it is taught

that in the Kula modality (of practice) (prakriyā) the disciple obtains knowledge

by (means of) the mouth of (his teacher’s) consort (dūt7). Therefore, here (in

"" It appears likely, judging from the form and content of this verse, that it was drawn

from the same lost work by Abhinavagupta quoted by Jayaratha at the end of his
commentary on verse 1/13 above. Is it the Śrīpūrvapañcikā?

In a general sense, the title Bhaṭṭa is given to learned Brahmins, and is a way of
addressing princes reverentially. It comes at the end of the names of a number of
Kashmiri teachers, for example, Kallaṭabhaṭṭa, who is the author of the Stanzas on
Vibration (spandakārikā). Bhaṭṭārikā is the feminine form of the title. It is a respectful
form of address to queens and princesses, and so, as in the male equivalent, to female
teachers. The Goddess is also sometimes addressed in this way. Women were teachers
both in the Trika, as in this case, and in the Krama (see below, TĀv ad 4/173ab).

Above (1/9) Śrīkaṇṭha is clearly said to have been a human teacher ‘manifest in the
worldʼ, and so was Bhairava/Śiva, who was visible to all.

We have seen that Narasiṁha was the name of Abhinava’s father. Here the word

serves as an epithet or title. It appears that Abhinava intends both. Just as ‘Śambhu’ is a

name both for Śiva and his teacher Śambhunātha, the other names can refer both to Śiva

and earthly teachers. Moreover, they may also be names of other teachers. Thus,

Śrīkaṇṭha is a name of Śiva as both deity and teacher (above, 1/9). We may see an

allusion to Bhūtirāja, another of Abhinava’s teachers, in the word ‘glory — bhūti.
Similarly, the word ‘vīra’ (‘Kaula adept) may refer to Vīranātha (see note 214 below).

Thus, Abhinava is cleverly expressing that his Trika teacher Śambhunātha is Śiva
(Śambhu) Himṣelf, as are these other teachers, even as they are all epithets of the same
Sāmbhunātha/Śiva.
Read -kalāśrayā- with MS K for kalāśriyā. Abhinava refers to his mother in this
way above in the very first line of the first verse. Here ‘glory° — bhāūti — may also refer
covertly to Abhinava’s Krama teacher Bhūtirāja.
We may read, as I have translated, the word ‘vīra’ (literally meaning ‘hero) as an
epithet applied to Narasiṁha, indicating that he was a Kaula adept. We may also read
these words independently, in which case ‘vīra’ should be taken to be a title given to a

teacher. An example of this usage is with reference to an early Krama teacher called
Hrasvanātha or Vāmana, who was also called Vīranātha or Vīravāmanaka (see below,

TĀy ad 4/173ab).

" Ūrmikaulārṇava 3/108 ab. This line is also quoted again below in TĀv ad 29/122cd-

123ab. There the reading is priye (‘O beloved’) for punaḥ (‘again’). which is the reading

in the surviving manuṣcript.
The dāūrī is the partner of the Kaula adept who practices ritual union with her in the

Kula modality of practice (kulaprakriyā) taught below in chapter twenty-nine. The rite,
or a possible part of it, as it is described there, entails that the female partner take the
Kula substance produced by the male partner in her mouth. She then passes it into her
partner’s mouth, he returns it, and so on back and forth until it is consumed (29/126129). Full of the vitality of consciousness, the substance bestows yogic


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


this school) one takes (the teachings equally) from both the teacher and his
consort, as being on an equal footing.
Surely, (one may ask,) having (introduced and) acknowledged in

general terms (the teacher who is) the means (that effects) the modality of

practice (prakriyā) (taught in the) Trika system (darśana), as there is (a

accomplishments (siddhi) and induces higher states of consciousness. The transmission

of insight ‘knowledge’ takes place analogously from the dāt’s mouth.
The word darśana literally means ‘the act of seeing or viewingʼ. It also means ‘a
philosophical systemʼ, which in India, according to the nature of the system, may be
more or less theological, logical, systematic, theistic, atheist, related to a religious
tradition, or independent. The word appears in the titles of compendiums of such
systems. Well known examples are the Saḍdarśanasamuccaya (A Compendium of the
Six Philosophical Systems) by Haribhadra Sūri, the Saḍdarśanasaṁgraha of Rajaśekhara,
and the Sarvadarśanasaṁgraha by Mādhava. (See Halbfass 1988: 263 ff., who discusses

the history of the usage of this term in this sense.) The word ‘darśana’ can have a broad

generic sense. The term Śaivadarśana (See KuKh 30/166ab) refers to all the schools of

Āgamic Śaivism collectively, which Kashmiri Śaivites refer to as ‘Pārameśvaradarśāna’

(below, comm. 1/36). It is also regularly used to mean ‘Tantric or Kaula teachingʼ. Each
one of the Kaula traditions (āmnāya) is a ‘darśana. It denotes both the entire Tantric

system, and, as the rites and Yogic practices taught in any Tantric system imply a view
of reality, it also implicitly denotes its theoretical, metaphysical basis.
Again, the word ‘darśana’ denotes what could, broadly speaking, be called a
religion or religious tradition, and so entails the same problems of definition that we

encounter when trying to define what religion in India is in general. In this sense, darśana

denotes both a larger generic identity — what we call ‘religion’ — as well as a specific one —
what might be called a ‘cult’ with relation to a specific deity, or a ‘sect’. Thus, the religions,
Buddhism and Jainism, are referred to as darśanas (see KuKh 68/50), just as schools of
Śaiviṣm are (ibid. 30/166ab). The same term may also be used to denote a particular phase
ofa religion, as in the expression ‘vaidikadarśana’ (see KuKh 68/131). Accordingly, the
Buddhists, Jains, Vedikas (bhaṭṭa), Sauras, Vaiṣṇavas and Śaivas constitute a group of six
‘darśanas’ (ṣaḍidarśana), recalling the standard set of six philosophical systems
(saḍdarśana) (YKh (1) 4/175 and JY 4/20/244 quoted below in comm. 29/73cd-75ab).

In this context we note that Kaulism as a whole is said to be a darśana even

when it appears, as it did in the first phase of its development, embedded in the Śaiva
Tantras as an option or a modality (kulaprakriyā or kulācāra) contrasted with the
Tantric (tantraprakriyā or tantrācāra). In the Netratantra, for example, we find a

chapter dedicated to ‘an explanation of the Kula tradition’ (kulāmnāyanidarśana) (NT

12/īab). Kṣemarāja explains that this is the kulāmnāyadarśana, the essential feature of

which, as presented in this brief chapter of the NT, is the worship of the eight Mothers.
Independent Kula Tantric systems are also termed darśanas. Jayaratha, in his

commentary on the Vāmakeśvarimata (also called Nityāṣoḍaśikārṇava) of the Śrīvidyā
tradition refers to its teachings in this way at least twice (VM pp. 48 and 125; Padoux
1994: 28). Clearly, in this case, darśana does not denote a philosophical system,
although it may appear to have this sense when used by Kashmiri Śaiva authors to

denote the schools of Kashmiri Śaivism, which with respect to the Tantras that are their
more or less proximate sources, are more sophisticated and ‘philosophical’. This is

clearly the case for example with the Spanda school, that does not have an equivalent in

the Tantras. Thus, Rājānaka Rāma, who comments on the Spandakārikā, uses the term

‘darśana’ to ddistinguish the teachings of the Spanda school from those of other

darśanas (SpKāvi, p. 39). Bhagavatotpala also refers to the Spanda teachings as an
independent (svatantra) ‘darśana’ (SpPra, p. 6). However, in the case of the other
schools of Kashmiri Śaivism, apart from the Pratyabhijñā, which is constructed in a

TANTRĀLOKA

whole) group of scriptures that expound that reality (artha),® how will (that
task) be accomplished by taking the venerable Mālinīvijayottara alone as (the
main) authority? With this doubt in mind, he says:

šarzzm ffēt rvrzīī fēēā: 1| z I
na tad astīha yan na śrīmālinīvijayottare |
devadevena nirdiṣṭaṁ svaśabdenātha liṅgataḥ || 17 ||
manner typical of Indian philosophical systems, the application of the same term implies
added resonances. Thus, Maheśvarānanda claims that the Kashmiri Krama school (also
called Kālīkrama, Mahārthakrama and Mahānaya) is more excellent than all the currents
(srotas) of the teachings of the Śaiva scriptures because it is the essence of all the

darśanas (MM p. 171-172). Similaty, Śitikaṇṭha in his Mahānāyaprakāśa (Light on the

Great Teaching) refers to the Krama system as one of several kuladarśanas (MP (1 Śk)
p. 111. See also Dyczkowski 1989: 75-77.) The term ‘Kramadarśana’ is not uncommon
(for example, see below the introductory remarks of the commentary on 3/256-257 and

also TĀv ad 4/173ab, where this expression appears twice). Trika is referred to as a
darśana several times in other Kashmiri Śaiva sources. In his commentary on the eighth

aphorism of the Pratyabhijñāhrṛdaya, for example, Ksemarāja says that Trikadarśana is
the highest form of nondualism (paramādvaya). Similarly, although Maheśvarānanda

distinguishes between the Trika and Krama as two darśanas, he maintains that because
of their common monistic idealism, there is not much difference between them (MM p.

92.) In this case, Maheśvarānanda is thinking of Trika as a philosophical system.

Jayaratha goes so far as to identify the teachers of the Trikadarśana as those of the
Pratyabhijñā, which is in form and content a typical Indian philosophical system (see
below comm. on 4/172).

" The word ‘artha’ conveys a number of meanings, both general and technical.

Áccording to common usage, ‘artha’ basically means ‘aim’, ‘purpose’ or ‘meaning’, as
in the expression ‘śabdārtha’ — ‘the meaning of a word’. By extension ‘artha’ also
means ‘a thingʼ, insofar as ‘things’ are the ‘meanings’ of words. Thus, the word
‘paramārtha’ means ‘supreme (parama) thing’, i.e. ultimate reality. Less common is the
similar expression ‘tattvārtha’ for the ‘(ultimate) reality (artha) of reality (tattva), i.e.

‘the true reality’. The word ‘artha’ is also used in a technical sense to mean a ‘doctrine’
or ‘system’ʼ. Thus, we come across the expression ‘trikārtha’ which means both the
‘teachings of the Trika’ or ‘ultimate reality as expounded in the Trika teachings’.

Abhinava uses this expression when he writes: ‘in fact according to the Trika teachings
(trikārtha) the Trident is the abode of worshipʼ (vastutaḥ pūjādhāma triśūlaṁ trikārthe
PTv p. 54). Analogously, we come across the expression ‘spandārtha’. So, for example,
Rājānaka Rāma calls his commentary on the Stanzas of Vibration ‘Spandārthasūtrāvali’
— ‘the Row of the Thread of the Spanda teachings’. The ‘Śpandārthasūtra’ is the
Spandakārikā. Similarly, we find the expression ‘kramārtha’ for the teachings and
reality taught in the Krama system, as well as ‘mahārtha’. According to
Maheśvarānanda, the latter expression encompasses a range of semantic connotations
including ‘Great Meaning’ʼ, ‘Great Teaching’, ‘Great Goal’ and ‘Great Reality°. Thus,

he writes:

‘(Mahārtha) is ‘great’ (mahat) insofar as it is the ground of every one of the

diverse principles of meaning (arthatattva). It is the reality/meaning (artha) which is the

principle to be realised and can encompass every meaning /thing (artha) in all its major
and minor divisions.' (MM p. 176)


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


There is nothing here (in the Tantrāloka) not taught by the God of
gods in the venerable Mālinīvijayottara (Tantra), whether (directly) in His

own words or (indirectly) by allusion (iṅgataḥ).

dtis called) ‘the venerable Mālinīvijayottara’ because by the ‘victory
(vijaya), that is, excellence overall, of (the alphabet goddess) Mālinī, who

begins with N and ends with PH, it descends (frtom) (urtarati), that is, flows
forth from all the currents (of the scriptures) because it is the essence (of the
teachings) of all the scriptures. He (goes on) to say just this:

GSI aṬravāzazfrā
gsgṛā̃ faaī: |
āīaṚ fr+raīāi fṝ ṁar cīra 1 2. 11
daśāṣṭādaśavasv aṣṭabhinnaṁ yac chāsanaṁ vibhoḥ |

tatsāraṁ trikaśāstraṁ hi tatsāraṁ mālinīmatam |)| 18 ||

The teaching (śāsana) of the pervasive Lord is divided into (groups

of) ten, eighteen and eight times eight (Tantras), the essence of which is the

Trika scriptures (śāstra), and the essence of that is the Mālinīmata.

! The expression liigataḥ here translated as ‘by allusion’ means more literally ‘by
being indicated’. The matters the MV treats only cursorily or not at all are, according to
Abhinava, implicitly indicated by it as, for example, when some procedure is required to

complete a rite. This is all the more so, for all doctrinal and philosophical matters which
Abhinava understands to be implicit, it is to teach, as it must, a nondualist view.

Also called Parā (the Supreme), Mālinī (the Lady with a [Garland of Leṭters]) is the

Goddess of the Trika. She is an embodiment of the power of Speech, and so Her body is
made of the energies of the fifty letters of the alphabet. Mātṛkā (the Little Mother) is

another Goddess of the alphabet, but while the energies of the letters that constitute Her
body are arranged in the normal order of the Sanskrit alphabet, those of Mālinī are in a

different order, beginning with the letter N and ending with PH. This is the order in

which these letters are found on the body of the Goddess and hence projected onto the
body of the worshipper to generate the same body of phonemic energies as the deity.
Somadeva Vasudeva has demonstrated that the shape of the letters of old Kashmirian

Śāradā script correspond to those of the parts of the body of the standing figure of the
goddess. See below, 15/117cd-120 (concerning Mātṛkā) and 15/121-125ab (concerning
Mālinī).

Read cyavate for plavate.
Concerning the hierarchy of scriptures with reference to TĀ 1/18 see below 13/300 f1

and notes. See also, 37/13cd-26 and MVV 1/391-399. Swami Lakshmanjoo (1995: 9)
explains: ‘Lord Śiva is full to overflowing with five powers, namely, those of
consciousness, bliss, will, knowledge and action. Śiva who is full of (these) energies
always primarily consists of the power of grace (anugrahaśakti). Our venerable teacher
(Abhinavagupta) says at the beginning of his Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa that ‘in reality, the

Supreme Lord's nature is grace.’ Lord Śiva’s grace has come down to earth in the form
of the Tantras. In reality, all the Tantras are Śiva’s own nature, within which the power

of Speech always resides. Then, by the power of grace, a Tantra descends onto the level
of the Speech of Vision (pasśyantī). One should remember that Supreme Speech and the

Speech of Vision abide as the nondual nature of this Tantra, and both forms of Speech

TANTRĀLOKA

(I) Here (according to our system), Supreme Speech is (awakened)

consciousness (bodha), of which the essence is supreme reflective awareness. It

are merged in their own nature in the form of questions and answers. Subsequently,
when this Tantra descends onto the level of the Middle Speech, then its nature as
denoted and denotator, or question and answer, begins to be delineated. After that, this
Tantra descendsin a clearly apparent form onto the level of Corporeal Speech. Then,
assuming the form of Svacchandanātha, Lord Śiva, manifests His five powers as five
faces, the names of which are Īśāna, Tatpuruṣa, Sadyojāta, Vāmadeva and Aghora. The
first three of these faces, thatis, Īśāna, Tatpuruṣa, and Sadyojāta, manifest ten Tantras

which are predominantly dualist and are called Śiva Tantras. Then when the remaining
two faces, that is, Vāṃadeva and Aghora, penetrate together into the three previous
ones, the Rudra Tantras, which are predominantly dualist-cum-nondualist, come into
being. These Rudra Tantras are eighteen in number. Again, when Īśāna’s face, which is
predominantly the power of consciousness, Tatpuruṣa's face, which is predominantly
the power of bliss, Sadyojāta’s face, which is predominantly the power of the will, and

Vāmadeva’s face which is predominantly the power of knowledge, penetrate

simultaneously and fully into the completely full (and perfect) face on the right, that is,
the face of Aghora; then the sixty-four Bhairava Tantras, which are predominantly
nondualist, come into being. Thus, in this way, by means of His independent power of

grace, the Lord Svacchandanātha reveals the ninety-two Tantras on the level of

Corporeal Speech through His five faces for the benefit of the world. The essence of
these ninety-two Tantras is the Mālinīvijayottara Tantra, on the basis of which our

teacher (Abhinavagupta) has composed the Tantrāloka.

The most complete account of the levels of Speech is found in Abhinava’s
commentary on the PT, over half of which is on the first four of its thirty-six verses. He
structures it around the contents and nature of the four levels of Speech, that is, Supreme

Speech (parāvāc), the Speech of Vision (paśyantī), the Middle (madhyamā) and
Corporeal (vaikharī) Speech. These are as follows. 1) Supreme Speech is the reflective
awareness Śiva, who is absolute consciousness, has that ‘I am’ʼ (aham), which embraces

within itself all the energies of this self-awareness. Devoid of objectivity in any form, it

is the perpetual affirmation of Being, which communicates and affirms its own perfect
infinite existence to itself. As such it is understood to be an inner discourse (saṅjalpa)
which, nonconceptual and not formed into words, is not based on convention (saṁketa).

Iṭis the inherent freedom, which is the reflective awareness of absolute consciousness,
by virtue of which it is the one absolute reality. AIl the scriptures abide at this level,

merged at one with the supreme power of Speech. At this level, the object they denote

(vācya), is the true ultimate nature of Deity and the words of the scriptures that expound
and explain it (vācaka) (See Swami Lakshmanjoo 2006: 2-3).
At the next level, that is, the Speech of Vision (paśyantī), consciousness
develops into that of a perceiving subjectivity. As such, it is related to its object as yet
undivided from it. Held within the perceiving subjectivity, it is the reflective awareness

of itself as the perceiver in relation to all things shining within it, as one with it in a

potential form of all that will be emitted on the following levels. This level of Speech
‘seesʼ all things that are to be emitted, within itself, at one with itself, ‘like a flame in a
fire’. Thus, at this level, word and the objective reality (artha) it denotes, along with its
meaning (artha), are still one. Here too language is not articulated as a stream of words
and their objects of denotation. It is the reflective awareness of the perceiver or

‘knower who thereby has the capacity to perceive and know everything, ready and

propense to know whatever is presented to it. At the supreme level, Speech is the

reflective awareness that is the essential, inherent foundation of consciousness itself. It
is what makes absolute consciousness absolute and conscious. Devoid of reflective
awareness, it would be insentient, and as such, inert, conditioned and limited. Unrelated


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


is full (to overflowing) with all things, and so all the scripture (śāstra) unfolds
as supreme consciousness here within it. (2) This being s0, the reflective
awareness of ‘’ (consciousness) arises inwardly on the plane of the Speech
of
Vision (paśyantī) as unique (asādhāraṇa) because its nature is undivided into
word and meaning (and such is the condition of scripture at this stage).

Therefore, contemplated there by the subject who reflects,. the object of

denotation, that is, (the reality which is the) meaning (of a word), pulses
radiantly (sphurati) (enveloped and) covered over with (the pure subjectivity of)
‘I-ness’. (3) After that, that same (scripture) pours out only inwardly (within the
to any ‘other’, this level is indefinable even as ‘supreme’, as that would entail the
existence of a second lesser reality in relation to which it is supreme. At the next level,

the Speech of reflective awareness is ‘supreme’ in relation to the potential objectivit

y

towards which, although undefined, it is oriented. It is what makes of consciousness a

subject which perceives its object. The words of scriptures and their object of denotatio
n
that have descended to this level are one, as they are on the level of Supreme Speech
from which they have descended, but here are propense to manifest externally
(Swami
Lakshmaṇjoo 2006: 2).
The next level, Middle Speech (mnadhyamā), manifests on the plane of ideation
and is the Speech of thought. At this stage, words and their meanings are experienc
ed as

distinct realitis, although still only mental ones. At this level, the words of the

scriptures and what they denote are distinct from one another, as are scriptures
themselves. They are made manifest within the Supreme Lord’s inner state (antardaś

and they are experienced there (Swami Lakshmanjoo 2006: 2).
K. Kuṇjunni Raja (1963: 148) explains from a purely linguistic point of view:
‘The next stage in the manifestation of the speech principle is called madhyamā
or the intermediate, since it lies between paśyanṁī and vaikharī. This is the
utterance in
its phonological structure, the sound pattern of the norm. It is psychological in its
nature
and can be comprehended by intellect. All the elements linguistically relevant
to the

sentence are present in a latent form at this stage. The same meaning will be conveyed

and the same sphoṭa will be revealed by different forms of madhyamā, depending
on the
language adopted. This corresponds to prākṛta-dhvani. At this stage all
the individual
peculiarities of the speaker are present in the utterance along with the linguistic
ally
relevant parts.”
Finally, Speech issues out externally as Corporeal Speech (vaikharī). At this
level language denotes external, objectively existing things and the relationsh
ips
between them, their qualities and activity etc. In this way, the universe of words
and
meanings is made manifest progressively on the model of the articulation of speech
that

arises out of pure consciousness. The scriptures extend at this level within the power of
Corporeal Speech, and there each is clearly experienced individually, just as their words
and the objects they denote are perceived to be distinct (ibid.). Thus, on the same model,

Śiva’s Speech generates both the manifest universe and the scriptures.
For a detailed
exposition of the levels of Speech (or Word), see PTyv pp. 8-11 and 102-159,
Ruegg
1959: 79-81, Gnoli 1959: 55-63, Iyer 1969: 142-145, Aklujkar 1970: 67, and
for the

most complete account, Padoux 1990: 166-222. Jayaratha presents another account
of
the levels of Speech below in his commentary on 3/235cd-236ab. Middle Speech is
discussed in detail below in the notes to 15/128¢d-138ab.
Read san for sat. Throughout the printed edition the present participle of the root
as —
‘to be appears as sat rather than the correct form san. The same error is found in

manuscripts.

Read pratyavamarśakeṇa for pratyavamarśakena.

all the

TANTRĀLOKA

mind) onto the plane of the Middle Speech (madhyamā) as separate words and
their denoted meanings, because the unfolding expansion (prapañca) of subject
and object has arisen (within it). There the Supreme Lord (parameśvara) abides
on the plane of Sadāśiva and Īśvara by subtly manifesting (āṣūtraṇa) (his) five
faces of consciousness, bliss, will, knowledge and action. Thus, by (variously)
combining the group of his five faces, He brings down (into the world) the
entire (corpus of) scripture (śāstra) made of the five currents (srotas) and its

wonderful diversity with its divisions and subdivisions. (He does this) by

making (them clearly) manifest (uftaṅkana)° on the planes of unity (abheda),

unity-in-diversity (bhedābheda) and diversity (bheda), that it may become
fully evident on (4) the external plane of Corporeal Speech (vaikharī)." The
Ten Sivāgamas (This happens) in this way. First of all, three divisions
The five faces of Śiva are His forms as the powerholders of His five main energies
(Śakti) on the Sadāśiva level, which corresponds to Śiva's experience that ‘I am (all)

this’ (aham idam). They abidein a differentiated but still potential state at the Middle
level of Speech (madhyamā), on which mind and intellect operate, and are fully
manifest at the Corporeal (vaikhari) audible articulate level of Speech as the scriptures.

The word ‘uṭṭaṅkaṇa’ literally means ‘stamping’, ‘etching’ or ‘inscribing’, and so by
extension, ‘characterizing’ or ‘manifesting’. We shall see a little further ahead that there

are three categories of Śaiva scripture called Bhairava, Śiva, and Rudra, which are said
to teach that reality is 1) nondual (abheda), 2) unity-in-diversity (bhedābheda) and

3) diversity (bheda), respectively. Jayaratha implies here that the reason for this is
because they are ‘stamped with these three planes of existence and are themselves
‘stamped’ onto them. In other words, the Supreme Lord, Who is pure consciousness, is
the one reality that shines in these three states (avasthā) or on these planes (daśā). He
reveals the nature of these three planes in the corresponding categories of scripture and

so manifests them within them. At the same time, the three categories of scripture
manifest within the three states as the reflective awareness that, at this level of Speech,
which is that of thought and intellection, is articulated into words.

The Āgamas of these three groups are not in fact distinguishable in this way.
Siddhāntāgamas display varying degrees of dualism, and Tantras considered to be
nondualistic are not so in all respects. Moreover, many of these Āgamas only had an
ideal nominal existence when these notions were formulated. Indeed, there is no

evidence that any of the ten Śiva Āgamas existedin the early period. The point is that,
according to this view, the revelation of the scriptures, like the development of Speech,

takes place in consonance with creation, that passes through these stages.

Hanneder (1998: n. 108) comments: ‘the interesting point here is that the five
or six streams (srotas) are still above normal language and that the categories to which

actual texts can be attributed are the three divisions.”
! Abhinava describes the levels of Speech concisely as follows: “Within the principle

of Supreme Speech the universe abides without divisions. Within the Speech of Vision
there is (a subtle) indication (of forthcoming) relative distinction (bheda). Relative
distinction has unfolded within the Middle (level of Speech), and within Corporeal
(Speech) the manifestation of relative distinction is (fully) evident in the form of
separate (distinct) objects of ongoing reflective awareness’ ĪPVV 1, p. 16.

A basic notion we find generally in the Śaivāgamas of all kinds is that they are

uttered by Sadāśiva’s five faces. The notion developed that he has spoken the Veda also,
as well as the major treatises on the mundane (laukika) sciences such as medicine and

astrology. So too revelations on Yoga (ādhyātmika) and the scriptures of the Pāśupata.
These are uttered by his five faces as in the following chart. Each face in its turn has

five faces, with the same names, making for further subdivisions. The upper face — that


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


(bheda, i.e. scriptures) manifest when each of the (faces of) Īśāna (I),

Tatpuruṣa (T) and Sadyojāta (S) is in a state of intent to be born (udbubhūṣaṇa)
(when they are about to appear) and (so too three more) when they are born
of Īśāna — uttered the Mantramārga consists of the five currents (śrotas) of the

Śaivāgama.

The following table has been drawn up on the basis of PūKā 1/17cd-20 quoted

in the Śataratnasaṁgraha (p. 8):

laukikaṁ vaidikaṁ caiva tathādhyãtmikam eva ca |

atimārgaṁ ca mantrākhyaṁ tantrabhedam anekadhā ||

sadyovāmamahāghorapuruṣeśānamūrtayaḥ |
pratyekaṁ pañcavaktrāḥ syus tair uktaṁ laukikādikam ||

pañcaviṁśatibhedena srotobhedaḥ prakīrtitaḥ |

eṣy evāntargataṁ vastu vāṅmayaṁ vastuvācakam ||

Direction | Face
West
North

South

East
Upper

Causal Lord | Śāstra

(Karaṇeśvara)
Sadyojāta | Brahmā
Vāmadeva | Viṣṇu

Laukika
Vaidika

Tatpuruṣa_|

Atimārga
Mantratantra

Aghora__|

Rudra

Sadāśiva

Ādhyātmika

See Dyczkowski 1988: 31 ff.

The Tantras refer to individual scriptures as ‘divisions’ (bheda) of the category to

which they belong. This usage allows for universal application to all forms of scripture
as well as technical treatises and the schools they represent, that are made manifest and
emerge out of the inner pleroma of consciousness which is present at the higher levels

of Speech, where they exist as potentials. Thus, each Tantra is a specific ‘bheda’, that is,
‘unit’ that belongs to a general ‘hheda’, that is, ‘categoryʼ. It is normally possible to
distinguish between the two usages of the word by observing the context in which it

appears.

The long passage that follows deals with how the ‘divisions' (to which Āgamas

correspond) are formed by the combination of Sadāśiva’s faces. It is somewhat terse and

complex. In order to understand it clearly we refer the reader to the following concise
explanation supplied by Gnoli in a note to his Italian translation of the Tantrāloka: ‘The
various scriptures, divided into groups of ten, eighteen and sixty-four, related to the state

of diversity, unity-in-diversity and nonduality [respectively], presided over by Śiva,
Rudra and Bhairava, are the result of the varied combination of Śiva’s five faces,

namely, Īśāna (), Tatpuruṣa (T), Sadyojāta (S), Vāmadeva (V) and Aghora (A)
(concerning which see below 15/203cd-204ab). Abhinavagupta has expounded the

nature of Śiva’s five faces and their various combinations in his two commentaries on

the MVT namely, the lost (Śrīpārva-) Pañcikā and the Vārttika. Abhinava himself refers
us to the Mālinīvijayaślokavārttika (MVV) (in TĀ 37/30). Six of the first group of ten

scriptures are derived from the three faces of Ī, T and S in their dual form as ‘born’

(udbhūta) and ‘intent to be born’ (udbhubhūṣu), one from them all together, and three
from the couples IT, ĪS and ST (see MVV 1/374-375). Two of the scriptures of the
group of eighteen come from the two faces V and A individually, three from the pairs,

IV. IA and AV; four from the triads ITV, ĪTA, ĪSV and ĪSA; three from the triads TSV.
TSA, and TVA; one from the triad SVA; four from the tetrads ĪTSVA, ĪTSA, ĪTVA and
ĪSVA; and one from the pentad ĪTSVA (MVV 1/375 ff.). The sixty-four scriptures of

TANTRĀLOKA

(udbhūta). Thus, there are six divisions (formed) by single (faces) (nos. 1-6).

The three manifesting together make another division (no. 7). Īśa and Tatpuruṣa,
Īśa and Sadyojāta, Sadyojāta and Tatpuruṣa, taken together as pairs — these
three, give rise to three (more) divisions (nos. 8-10). These are the ten Śiva
divisions that are predominantly dualist (bhedapradhāna). That is said (in the
Mālinīvijayavārtika):
‘Īśa, Tatpuruṣa and Sadyojāta — when each one has come into being and
is in a state of intent to come into being, they together make six. A triad is (also)
formed by the three in pairs, which along with one (of them, alḻtogether) made

up in this way the ten Śiva divisions (i.e., Āgamas).

The Eighteen Rudrāgamas

By combining them with Vāmadeva and Aghora (which are the

remaining faces), there are eighteen Rudra divisions. There (in that case), in the

same way, each single division, that is, Vāmadeva (no. 1) and Aghora (no. 2),
(together make) two divisions. In (this) five-fold grouping also, the three faces,

Īśa, (Tatpuruṣa and Sadyojāta are those) mentioned in the Śiva divisions and so

(this grouping is not mentioned again here) (śivabhedeṣu uktatvāt) [aṣ it is not

right to say something again that has already been said. This is because
mentioned in the Śiva divisions there are in this way three divisions of two
natures (making six), along with one (of three together) and three divisions

made of three (pairings) (of three) of the five (faces) (śivabhedeṣu uktatvāt).]

And because Tatpuruṣa and Sadyojāta do not have this same kind of

nature, no union takes place with these two. (Thus) as four (combinations) do

the third group are formed from the four stages of ‘intent to be born’, ‘born’, ‘intent to

concealment’ (tirodhatsu) and ‘concealed’ (tirohita). The first four faces pass through
theṣe stages and conclude in the fift, that is, A, and its various combination with other
faces (MVV 1/383 ff.).’
MVV 1/374-375ab. Instead of tad itthaṁ śivabhedānāṁ daśānām abhavat sthitiḥ

(‘made up in this way the ten Śiva divisions’), the edition of the MVV reads: jayate
śivabhedānāṁ daśānāṁ vividhā sthitiḥ (‘the manifold state of the ten Śiva (Āgamas)

arises).
Read ekena for tena.

! The passage between asterisks is missing in1 MSs Ch, J, Jh, and N. It reads:

punarvacanānupapatteḥ tathā dvyātmakatvena bhedatrayasya tena pañcānāṁ
tryātmakatvena
bhedatrayasya
Śivabhedeṣu
uktatvāt.
MS
K
reads:
punarvacanānupapatteḥ tena pañcānāṁ tryātmakatvena bhedatrayasya śivabhedeṣu

uktatvāt — i

itis not right to say something again, thus it is because it is mentioned

in the Śiva divisions that there are three types (of 6, 1 and 3 Āgamas) as having three
natures (out) of the five (faces). The repetition of sśivabhedeṣu uktatvāt that precedes
this passage and with which it ends is suspicious. Hardly anything is added by this
passage to what has been stated. It may well have been a gloss in the margin of a

manuscript that was written by mistake into the body of the text. Moreover, the word

‘tena’ makes no sense in the longer version, and so I have had to emended to ‘ekena’
(see previous note). This is not the case in the shorter version found in MS K, which

leads one to suppose that it is closer to the original presumed gloss.

Read with MSs Ch, J, Ih, Ñ T and Ḍ -jātayosścaivaṁ for -jātayostu evaṁ.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


not exist. (only) three divisions consisting of two (faces)’ remain,

namely,

IĪśa and Vāma (no. 3), Īśa and Aghora (no. 4), Aghora and
Vāma (no. 5). These
are the three divisions made of two (faces). In the same way,
the five, Iśa,
Tatpuruṣa, Ajāta, Vāma and Aghora, combining in triads (produ
ce) by uniting
(first)

with

and

(then)

in

due

order with

the

other faces,

six

(combinations). (Adding) three pertaining to Tatpuruṣa, and one
for Sadyojāta
uniting with the remaining faces. But even though there are ten
kinds, the first
triad consisting of Īśa, Tatpuruṣa and Sadyojāta has been mentio
ned amongst
the Śiva divisions, and the remaining triad of Īśa, Vāma and
Aghora will be

applied to a different task" In this way, just eight of the triadic divisio

remain. Thus, there are just eight divisions (formed from the)

IĪTV (no. 6), ĪTA (no. 7), ĪSV (no. 8), ĪSA (n0. 9), TSV (no.

ns

triads (namely,

10), TSA (no. 1 1),

TVA (no. 12) and SVA (no. 13)). Therefore, talk of each one

individually

should only be thought about, not spoken. In this way, what he intend
s to say is
that the union of Tatpuruṣa, Ajāta (i.e., Sadyojāta), Vāma and Aghor
a in pairs or
groups of four is not allowed (to take place) in the process of
producing the
knowledge (revealed in the scriptures). As this is the case also
with the triads,
that would entail the prohibition of many varieties. In this way,
reference to a

group of seven would also be unreasonable. So, enough of so many (details

).

In the same way, when these five are combined in groups
of four,
because for the aforementioned reason, although of five kinds,
Nara (i.e.,
Tatpuruṣa), Ajāta, Vāma and Aghora do not combine, so
there are (just) four
divisions (formed by the combination of) four (remaining faces);
(ITSV (no.

14), ĪTSA (no. 15), ĪTVA (no. 16), and ĪṢVA (no. 17)). When all

of these are

combined, it makes one division made of five (faces) (no. 18). In
this way there
are eighteen Rudra divisions which are (scriptures that) predom
inantly (teach)

unity-in-diversity. That is said (in the following passage):

‘If three faces (mentioned above) combine with the
right and left

(ones), then (that results in) seven divisions of two and eight divisi

three (faces). There are also four (combinations) of four

consists of (all) five. Thus, out of these twenty, (four

ons of

(faces), and one that

are omitted), as Tatpuruṣa

(Nara) and Ajāta do not combine with the two, Vāma and Aghora

, because

These are: Sadyojāta with Vāmadeva, Sadyojāta with Aghora
, Tatpuruṣa with
Vāmadeva and Tatpuruṣa with Aghora.
Read with MSs Ch, J, Jh, Ṅ, T, and D dvyātmakabheda- for dvyātmakaṁ
bheda-.
" See below, note 1,296 concerning the ‘remaining triad’.

Read with MSs Jh, Ṭ and D read ata evaikaikakathanaṁ for ata eva

thus confirming this translation.

ekakathanaṁ,

Apparently here Jayaratha is criticising a different view of how the faces combin
produce scriptures.
Read with Ch, J, Jh, and Ṭ saṁmīlanāyāṁ for saṁmīlanāyā.

which means the same. These four faces do not combine alone.

e to

reads melanāyāṁ,

But they may do so in

association with Īśāna, the remaining fifth face. So we get ĪTSV (14), ĪTSA

(16) and ĪSVA (17). The eighteenth is formed by combining all

the faces.

(15), ĪTVA

The first line of this quote corresponds to MVV 1/376cd.
Gnoli suggests that

Jayaratha may be quoting here from the lost (Śr)pūrvapañcikā.

Read with MSs k, ch, ū, t, and d: dvikā bhedā for āvikabhedā.
Read yataḥ for yātaḥ.

TANTRĀLOKA

(the faces in the) east and west do not possess knowledge independently. Thus

the (remaining) divisions are sixteen. But even there (in that case) also, there is

one (division) belonging to Vāmadeva, and above that (one which is)
Bhairava’s nature, which is (thus) the eighteen-fold state of the Rudra division

described by Śiva Himself in the scriptures.

Read with MSs Ch, J, Ih, Ñ T and D sivenaiva for sivenaivaṁ.

Lists of Āgamas (also called Tantras, Saṁhitās etc.) are commonly found in major
Siddhāntāgamas as well as Bhairavatantras. These are generally found in chapters
dedicated to the ‘descent of the Tantras’ (tantrāvatāra). I haye examined various canons
found in different types of Tantras in The Canon of the Śaivāgama and the Kubjikā
Tantras of the Western Tradition (SUNY 1988), to which the reader is referred. A full
survey has not yet been done. Here we may note two sources, both available as e-texts

that I had transcribed for the Muktabodha online library. One is in a manuscript called

Kālottaratantra NA MS n0. — 5-4632, NGMPP reel no. B 118/7 (308 folios in Nāgarī

script). This appears to be an apograph of NAK 1-1114, NGMPP B 25/7, an undated
Nepalese palm-leaf manuscript in the Nāgarī script, except that it has added the
Sārdhśatika recension from some other source (Goodall 2007, p. 129). It consists of

eight texts that identify themselves as Kaālottaras. They are: 1) Kālottare
√Jñānapañcāśikā (ff. 1v1-4v7). This is not a recension of the Kālottara. See Goodall
2007, pp. 127-128). 2) Kālajñāne Satikam (4v7-916). 3) Kālottare Sārádhaśatikam (1v16¥9). 4) Kālotare Dviśatikam ff. 1v1-W3. 5) Kālottare ‘dhyuṣṭaśatam
(Sārdhatriśatikam) .ff. 1v1-17yY3. 6) Kūālottare Saptaśatikam. 7) Kālottare
Trayodaśśatikam ff. 1v1-46y7. 8) Unidentified Kālottara.
Folios 1-2a of the Jīñānapañcāśikā contains lists of Āgamas: 10 Śivabheda, 18
Rudrabheda, 28 Gāruḍatantras, 32 Bhūtatantras, and 24 Vāmatantras (spoken by
Vāmadeva) making 112. A probably older list is in the Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha chapter
3 tantrāvatāra, published in Rauravāgama vol. 1, p. 7-9. Another source is chapter one
of the Pārvakāmikā kriyāpāda tantrāvatārapaṭalaḥ, which is the first chapter. The main

Āgamas of the five faces are listed along with the upāgamas associated with each one.
Ajitāgama kriyāpāda chapter 1 tantrāvatāra. There the twenty-eight Siddhāntas are

distributed amongst the five faces of Sadāśiva. The 10 Śivabheda are uttered by Īśāna,

the upper face. The 18 Śivabheda are distributed in the other four. A different

distribution is found in the Pauṣkarabhāṣya. Both are reported by Bhaṭ in his

introḍuction to the Rauravāgama p. xi. Although, as he himself remarks, this canon is
not amongst the oldest, it is interesting as it also presents the 28 Siddhāntas as coming
from all the faces. More commonly we find that they are said to come only from the
upper face, as we find in the Kāmikāgama:

īśānavaktrād ūrdhvasthāj jñānaṁ yat kāmikādikam |
daśāṣṭādaśabhedena śivarudrāvatārakaiḥ ||
‘The knowledge beginning with Kāmika issues forth from Īśāna’s mouth,
which is above in ten and eighteen divisions that have been brought down by Śivas and

Rudras.” PūKā 1/22

The names of the 28 Siddhāntas as presented in the Pauṣkarabhāṣya begins

as uṣual with Kāmika. They are as follows according to the Ajita:

Sadyojāta: Vijaya, Pārameśvara, Niśvāṣa, Prodgīta, Mukhabimba

Vāmadeva: Siddha, Śantāna, Śarvokta, Candrajñāna, Vimala
Aghora: Svāyambhuva, Vīra, Raurava, Makuṭa, Kiraṇa
Tatpuruṣa: Lalita, Anala, Vātula


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


And that is stated at length along with the names (of the scriptures) in

the venerable Śrīkaṇṭhī. That is thus (as follows):

“The knowledge in the upper current (of scriptures) is of two kinds

and is called Śiva and Rudra. The Śiva divisions are said to be:Kāmaka,
Yogaja, (A) Cintya, Maukuṭa, and Aṁśumat, Dīpa (Sūkṣma, Sāhasra,

Ajita, and Anataka).

O beloved, (now) listen to the Rudra divisions: Vijaya, Niḥśvāsa,
Udgīta. Pārameśvara, Mukhabimba, Siddha, Santāna, Nārasiṁhaka,
Candrāṁśu, Vīrabhadra, Āgneya, Svayambhuva, Visara, and the one called

Īśāna: Kāmika, Yogaja, Cintya, Kāraṇa, Ajita, Dīpta, Sūkṣma, Sahasra, Aṁśumat,
Suprabheda

According to the Pauṣkarabhāṣya:

Sadyojāta: Kāmika, Yogaja, Cintya, Kāraṇa, Ajita
Dipta, Sūkṣma, Sahasra, Aṁśumat, Suprabheda
aya, Viśvāsa, Svāyambhuva, Anala, Vīra
Tatpuruṣa: Raurava, Makuṭa, Vimala, Canrajñāna, Bimba

Īśāṅa: Prodgīta, Lalita Śiddha, Śantāna, Śarvokta, Pārameśvara, Kiraṇa, Vātula.

3 The Śrīkaṇṭhī, which Ksemarāja also calls the Śrīkaṇṭhīyasaṅhitā (vimarśinī on ŚSū

2/1 and uddyota on SVT 8/29) and Śrīkaṇṭhasaṁhitā (in vivṛti on StCi 84 and uddyota
on SvT 10/3-5) is an important Tantra for Trika Śaivites, who considered its
presentation of the Śaiva canon to be the most authoritative (see Pandey 1963: 139-143

and Dyczkowski 1988: p. 43 ff.. It has been recovered by Sanderson from a manuscript
of the Nityādisaṁgrahābhidhānapaddhati. This section has been published, unedited,
by Hanneder (1998: 240-268), from which the variants have been drawn.

v. 108-1 12.

The texts marked with an asterisk have been recovered wholly or in part, although

they have not all been published.

The Kiraṇatantra liṣts a Candrāṁśubheda. This may be the Aṁśumadbhedāgama, of
which there are several manuscripts or, more probably, the Candrāṁśu mentioned
further ahead.

Read, in accord with the published Śrākaṇṭhī (only significant variants will be noted):

kāmakaṁ, for kāmajaṁ. The Śrīkaṇṭhī (v. 122d) also calls it by its common name,

Kāmika. Śrīkaṇṭhī reads mākuṭaṁ for maukuṟaṁ (same reading in 123c). AIl but the

first word of this line is missing in the printed edition in its place read with the
SŚrīkaṇṭhī: dīpaṁ sūkṣmaṁ tu sāhasram ajitānatakaṁ tathā |

Read with K, Kh, Ch, J, Jh, Ṅ, T and D rudrabhedāñ chṛau priye for rudrabhedāṁs
tv imāñ chṛṇu.


Read niḥśvāsam udgītaṁ for niḥśvāsaṁ madgītaṁ. The Śrīkaṇṭhī reads this line:


vijayaṁ pārameśaṁ ca niśvāśodgītam eva ca. A Prodgītāgama exists (IPF T 1021). The

name appears in the canonical lists of the Siddhāntāgamas (see Dyczkowski 1988: 34

ff.). Moreover, in a section which follows these verses in the Śrīkaṇṭhī, which describes
how Śiva's body is made of the the twenty-eight Āgamas, Prodgīta is listed in the place
of Udgīta.

A Vīratantra has been recovered in South India, which is amongst the IFP transcripts

(29, 30, 31, and nine others). Whether it existed when the Śrīkaṇṭhī was written or was
(as is most likely) just a name in a largely ideal list which supplied names for Āgamas
that came to be redacted later, it makes no difference in this or many other similar cases.

What matters for the textual editor is that the name is the same.

TANTRĀLOKA

Raurava, Vimala, Kiraṇa, Lalita, and Saurabheya. 0 Maheśvaī, (these,)

they say, are the twenty-eight Tantras that have come from the upper current (of

scripture).


The TĀv reads: rauravāḥ pañca (the five Rauravas). The Sṛīkaṇṭhī reads:

rauravāhūṁ ca. I have emended to rauravākhyaṁ ca.

The SŚrīkaṇṁī reads aṣṭaviṁśatibhedaṁ tu ūrdhvasrotovinirgatam. (The same

irregular shortening of the second vowel of asṭāviṁśati- to aṣṭaviṁśati- is also found in
the MSs of the TĀ.) `(O Maheśvarī, (these) Tantras, they say are) the division of

twenty-eight that has come from the upper current’ These twenty-eight are the
Siddhāntāgamas. The Brahmayāmala, which is certainly one of the earliest, major Śaiva

Tantras, although it is not a Siddhāntāgama, mentions these two divisions of ten and
eighteen, associated with Śiva and Rudra respectively. Even s0, it appears that for some

centuries they existed only as names. As Goodall (1995, p. xiv-xv) explains: ‘of the
twenty-eight Tantras that are listed as scriptures of the Śaivasiddhānta very few are
demonstrably early works. Most are South Indian redactions or entirely fresh
compositions that were unknown to Rāmakaṇṭha [who was a Kashmiri Siddhāntin
belonging to the 11 century]. The first exegetes of the Siddhānta were all Kashmiris.
The earliest of them was Sadyojyotis, who is well known to Somānanda as his

predecessor, and so lived earlier than the middle of the ninth century. In the works that
have survived authored by him and his successors, such as Rāmakaṇṭha, in the

following few generations, a very limited number of Siddhāntāgamas are quoted or
mentioned. The manuscripts preserved in Nepal are the only ones surviving from the

early period prior to Abhinavagupta, either as originals or transcribed copies. There too

we find only very few Siddhāntāgamas. Conversely, although a good number of

Āgamas with these names have been recovered in South India, their predominant

concern is with temple ritual. Although the Āgamas and related Siddhānta sources of the
early period do deal with ritual, it is only rarely explicitly related to temple worship.

Moreover, there is very little mention of temple construction and architecture, which is a
major concern of the ones found in South India. Thus, it appears to be more than likely
that texts redacted in the later period in South India, not in the North, where the
Siddhānta most probably originated, were given names drawn from the ideal lists of

names found in earlier Āgamas. An attested example of this phenomenon are the
Āgamas of the Lingayats. They bear the same names as the twenty-eight
Siddhāntāgamas, but are quite different texts. To explain this, the Lingayats maintain
that their Āgamas are a continuation (urtarakhaṇḍa) of the Siddhāntāgamas. See

Goodall 1998: 402-417 and Sanderson 2007a: 233-234 for discussion.

The Āgamas that have been recovered have been marked with an asterisk.

Some of_them certainly do belong to the early period, notably the Nihśvāsa. This

lengthy Āgama is being edited by a team of scholars. Mukuṭa, Kiraṇa, Raurava (=
Ruru) and Kāmika (= Kāmaja) are quoted by Abhinava. Exemplars of most of the
existent Siddhāntāgamas that have not been edited, apart from the ones in Nepal

mentioned above, are in transcripts deposited in the French Institute of Indology in
Pondicherry. These can be viewed and downloaded from muktabodha.com.
The same appears to be the case with the sixty-four Bhairava Tantras. Even the
very form of the names of some entries, as for example, the eight Cakra Tantras, suggest

that they are just that ~ names (see Dyczkowski 1988: 42 ff.). A great deal has been lost
from the early period, so it not possible to say with any certainty how many of these

titles are real. An extensive and sure window we have that looks out onto the corpus of
available Śaiva Tantras and related literature prior to the eleventh century are references
and quotations by Kashmiri teachers, especially Abhinavagupta as well as Jayaratha,
who took care, it seems, to trace as many of Abhinava’s references as he could. An

annotated list of these texts is found at the end of the book along with the bibliography


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


And here (in this context) the same (Abhinavagupta says):


‘The group (of Āgamas) spoken by the Śivas is called Śiva. The group

(uttered) by the Rudras is said to be called Rudra.’
The Sixty-four Bhairavatantras

The ‘eight tīmes eight’ are the sixty-four Bhairava divisions. In a
similar way, within the southern face, which is by nature nondual and (consists
of) the innate nature (svarūpa), Śiva, Śakti and the mouth of the Yoginī, which
is called their union, there are four (stages) as ‘the intent to be born’, ‘born’,

‘intent on concealment’ (tirodhatsu) and ‘concealed’ (tirohita) of each one (of
the other four faces). Thus, if this group of sixteen divisions merges inwardly
simultaneously with the other four faces, then by combining with one another,

(they make) the sixty-four Bhairava divisions,® which are predominantly

nondualist. That is said (in the Mālinīvijayavārtika):

‘That which is inside, in the southern (stream of scriptures), is the Liṅga
of the Heart, which is considered to be the supreme Heart. That is also replete

with all the things that have been emitted and internalized. It assimilates

(grasana) the aspect which is the radiant energy (tejoṁśa) of Māyā that
and index. We notice that most of the titles listed in the Śrīkaṇṭhīyasaṁhitā are missing,

and conversely, that most of the Tantras mentioned by the Kashmiris are not mentioned
there.
We can also refer to the works written in South India by early Śrīvidyā authors,

the Siddhāntins there who wrote prior to the fourteenth century, and those who, like
Maheśvarānanda, for example, contributed to the Kashmiri Trika and related schools in

South India, where they were well-known. A good number of the early sources survived
there up to that time. Traces of the Kashmiri tradition remain in some form it seems in
Kerala, where deities like Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, rightly considered there to be of Kashmiri

origin, are still worshipped. These are subjects of ongoing and future research.
“ MVV 1/408d-409ab. Ten forms of Śiva, each a Śiva in his own right, uttered one of

the ten Śiyāgamas. Similarly, eighteen Rudras the eighteen Rudrāgamas.

° Instead of svarūpe śivaśakti- read with MS Kh: svarūpaśivaśakti-. Normally, the

Mouth of the Yoginī is reckoned to be a sixth face below the five faces of Sadāśiva,
from which issue the Kaula teachings. This may be a way of expressing the intimate

relationship of the Śākta Kaula teachings with those Bhairavatantras, that issue from the

southern face (see Dyczkowski 1988: 65 and 169, also below, note on comm. 6/194ab194cd (6/193-194ab)). Hanneder suggests another more subtle reason, which need not
be incompatible with this one. He writes (1998: 30 n. 114): It is rather odd to find the
yoginīvaktra here, as it is usually a name for the lower face. But here Jayaratha faces a

dilemma. On the one hand he wants to provide the reader with the names of the Tantras

by quoting the Śrīkaṇṭhī but he also wishes to interpret the passage in line with the
Vārtika [i.e. MVV]. Now these two sources differ in one important point: the Śrīkaṇṭhī

attaches much weight to the lower face, the Vārtika does not mention it, and — more

importantly — has no place in its system for it, since the sixth stream is already reserved

for the ārdhodhva [the current above the upper current. I think that Jayaratha’s way out

is to subsume the yoginīvaktra under the Aghora-face.’

4 x 16 = 64.
Read as suggested by the editor of the printed text, —sṛṣta- for —spaṣṭa-

TANTRĀLOKA

engenders

duality

and

s0,™

because

it

withdraws

all

(things

into

consciousness), it is black and bears the form of darkness.
To the degree the (other) four faces (apart from Aghora, the southern

one) merge inwardly there (into Bhairava), (they are) then% (each)
simultaneously (yugapat) divided (into four stages, namely) ‘intent to be born’,
‘born’, ‘intent on concealment’ and ‘concealed’ (tirohita), and (thus become)

sixteen. Entering into Śiva, who is free and the Heart of Emission, in the right

(face), then that scriptural corpus (śāstra) consisting of eight times eight

(scriptures)

(yugapat).

called

Bhairava

(comes

into

being

together)

all

at

once

And that is explained at length along with the names (of the scriptures)

in the venerable Śrīkaṇṭhī as follows:’

‘(Now) T will tell (you) briefly something else that was sung by the

Supreme Lord. I will tell that (group of) sixty-four with its divisions, part by
part. O (fair Goddess) praised by the Heroes, (in eight groups of eight) called
Bhairava, Yāmala and the one called Mata, Maṅgala, Cakrāṣṭaka, Sikhāṣṭaka,
Bahurūpa, the seventh, and Vāgīśa, which is said to be the eighth, (altogether

they make) eight.” That is the wheel (cakra) of Sadāśiva, which I will now tell
(you) in brief.

Read with the MVV —grasanāc ca tat for —grasanātmakam. Hanṇeder

translates ‘because it devours the particles of light (tejoiśa) that belong to Māyā and
foster duality. In the MVV, between this sentence and the previous one, Abhinava

inserts a reference to two verses of the Vijñānabhairava. Theṣse say: “(the yogi) should

imagine that the entire (expanse of the) sky is merged within (his) head as Bhairava’s
state. (Then he and) all that (exists) penetrates (and is absorbed) into the reality (which
is) the radiant energy (tejas) of Bhairava’s form.’ (85) Again: ʻIn the same way, (the
yogi) engaged in contemplating for a long time the (awesome) darkness on a stormy
night in the dark lunar fortnight (when there is no moon) attains Bhairava’s nature.
The point is that the Southern or Right Face of Sadāśiva is dark because it is the body of
Bhairava, within which the sixty-four Bhairava Tantras are revealed.

““ MVV reads: antarlīnatayā bhāti (to the degree the (other) four faces) manifest as

merged inwardly) instead of tatrāntarlīnatāṁ yāti (i.e. (to the degree the (other) four
faces) merge inwardly (there)).

õ Read with the MVV tato for itthaṁ.

“l MSs Ch, J, Jh, Ṅ, T and Ḍ read naisargike (‘pertaining to creation’) for vaisargike

(‘pertaining to emission’). I have retained the reading in the printed text, as it agrees
with the one found in the MVV. Hanneder understands that these are not just four
adjectives of Śiva. They are four aspects of Śiva (i.e. ʻfreeʼ, ‘Heart’, ‘emission’ and
‘right face’) which, combining with each of the sixteen, makes the sixty-four Bhairava
Tantras.

°“ MVV 1/383-384 and 388cd-390. 1/383cd-384 is quoted by Śivopādhyāya ad VBh 85

(84). This is preceded by the following verse which is said there to be also drawn from
the MVV but is not found there: Read with the MVV yugapad evaitad bhidā for
yugapad evaitad bheda- and aṣṭāṣṭakātmakaṁ śāstraṁ for aṣṭāṣṭakātma tacchāstraṁ.

Read ity asṭa for ity aṣṭo.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


(1) Svacchanda, Bhairava," Caṇḍa, Krodha, Unmattabhairava,

Asitāṅga, Mahocchuṣma, and Kapālīśa. These are the forms of Svacchanda

spoken by Bahurūpa.”

(2) Brahmayāmala, Viṣṇuyāmala, Skanda, Umā” and Ruru; the sixth
is said_to be Atharvanaṁ. Rudra is said to be the seventh, and Verāla the

(3) Next, O Great Goddess, hear (the names of) the Mata divisions of

my (Tantras).” There is the one called Rakta, and the Mata called Lampaṭa and

"" In order to make the full set of eight required here, one must read Svacchanda and

Bhairava as two separate entries, although it is clear that there is only one text, i.e. the

Svacchandabhairava. See following note.


In his commentary on SVT 1/4cd-7, Ksemarāja quotes the Sarvavīratantra as saying:


“The collection of scriptures (saṁhitā) is (divided into) four groups (pītha),
namely, Mudrā, Maṇḍalapītha, Mantrapīṭha and Vidyāpīṭha. Theṣe four books, namely,
the Svacchandabhairava, Caṇḍa, Krodha and Unmattabhairava, belong to the
Mantrapīṭha.’
See Sanderson (2007: 234), who reports that this same verse is also found in
the JY (ṣaṭka 1). Abhinava accepts this division of scripture into four piṭhas, a division
possibly first described in the Brahmayāmala and elaborated by subsequent Tantras
such as the Jayadrathāyāmala. Perhaps this is the reason why he dedicates chapters 30
to Mantras (which include Vidyās), 31 to Maṇḍalas, and 32 to Mudrās. (See

Dyczkowski 1988: 49 ff. and 104 ff. for an analysis of the canon of the JY and its

allocation of Tantras to the four pīṭhas).
Although these eight are presented as Tantras, the forms of (Śvacchanda)
Bhairava from which they draw their names each utter eight Tantras. Thus, there are

‘eight times eight’ Tantras. Note that ‘Bahurūpa’, who spoke this group of eight Tantras,
is Svacchandabhairava, the first of the eight. This makes sense as Aghora, Sadāśiva’s
southern face that utters the Bhairavatantras, is Svacchandabhairava.
” Read with the Śrīkaṇṭhī: skandam umā for svacchandaś ca.

The group of eight Yāmalas continued to be considered such a standard set that a text

called ‘Yāmalāṣṭakatantra’ — the Tantra of the eight Yāmalas, which calls itself a

Tantra, although more of the nature of a compendium, was ‘revealed’ some centuries
later. It is being edited by Prof. Galewicz at the University of Krakow in Poland. The

Brahmayāmala (also called Picumata), Viṣṇuyāmala, Skandayāmala, Umāyāmala and
Rudrayāmala are listed as a set of five Yāmalatantras belonging to the Vidyāpīṭha
(Sanderson 2007a: 235). For an extended discussion based on the JY (ṣaṭka 1), see

Dyczkowski 1988: 114-119.
” This repetition is, it seems, the classification of the Matatantras found elsewhere.

Thus, a number of Matatantras listed in the JY (ṣaṟka 1) are common with this list but

are presented as derivative Tantras of the Brahmayāmala / Picumata, which it considers

to be the main Matatantra. According to the JY (1) there are eight Matatantras
associated with the Brahmayāmala | Picumata, several of which correspond. They are:
Raktāmata, Pecikāmata, Mṛgālinīmata, Śambarāmata, Utphullakāmata, Nīlakeśīmata,
Bhāruṇḍāmata and Piṅgalāmata (quoted in Dyczkowski 1988: 155, also Sanderson
2006: 249 n 54). The Piṅgalāmata itself lists: Durvāsomata, Pecikāmata,
Sarasvatīmata, Jayadratha Phetkāramata, Raktāmata and Lampaṭāmata as the ‘sevenfold BY°. The reference is drawn from Sanderson (ibid.). See Dyczkowski 1988: 115.

TANTRĀLOKA

that of Lakṣmī, the fifth is Kālikā.”' The one called Piṅgalā”” is the sixth.

Another is the Uīphullakamata, and the one called Viśva is said to be the
eighth. O (Goddess) praised by the gods; these are said to be the Caṇḍa division
of the Bhairava (Tantras).

(4) Bhairavī is said to be the first and has arisen from the Picutantra.

(Bhairavī) is said to be of two kinds. Then the third is said to be Brahmī, and

Kalāā” is the fourth. The one called Vijayā is the fifth, and the one called
Candrā is the sixth. (The last two are) Maṅgalā and Sarvamaṅgalā This is

the Maṅgala diviṣsion spoken by Krodheśa.
(5) The first is Mantracakra. The second is Varṇacakra. The third is

Śakticakra, and Kalācakra is the fourth. The fith is Binducakra. The sixth is
called Nāda. The seventh is Guhyacakra, and the eighth is said to be Khacakra.

This is the Cakra division spoken by Asitāṅga.
(6) Andhaka, Rurubheda, the one called Aja, the one called Mūla,

Varṇamaṇṭha, Viḍaṅga, Jvālina and Mātṛrodana were praised, 0

Supreme Goddess (Parameśvarī), by the Supreme Lord, Ruru.
(7) Bhairavī, Citrikā, the one called Haṁsā, and Kadambikā, Hṛllekhā,

Candralekhā, Vidyullekhā, and Vidyutmat. These are Vāgīśa’s divisions,
spoken by Kapālīśa.

(8) Bhairavī, said to be Śikhā, (is the first), and Vīṇā is the second.

The third is Vīṇāmaṇi, and Sammoha is the fourth. The fifth is Ḍamara, and

the sixth also is Atharvaka. The seventh is said to be Kabandha. SŚiraścheda
The printed text reads Cālikā, which makes no sense, so I have adopted the reading
in NSA 1/29.

Emend piṅgalādyaṁ to piṅgalākhyaṁ, and in the next line read with MSs Kh, Ch, ÑṄ

and D utphullakamataṁ for utphullakaṁ mataṁ. Abhinava mentions a Tantra called
Utphulla (below 29/166ab), that Jayaratha glosses as utphullakamatam. Emend
viśvādya to viśvākhyaṁ. Manuscripts of the Piṅgalāmata exist (see bibliography).

” The Brahmayāmala is also called Picumata. The word ‘picu’ commonly means
‘cotton.. The BY is thus the Mata teaching of the Yoginī of the cotton plant. See
Dyczkowski 1988: 115 for the JY (1) derivation of the name, in quite a different sense.

This Picutantra, if it existed, would be different from it.
” Read brāhmī kalā for brāhmīkalā.
This may be the Maṅgalaśāṣtra quoted by Abhinava in 5/40. The same verse appears
several times in Jayaratha’s commentary and elsewhere.
! The edition reads varṇabhaṇṭhaṁ. The simple emendation ‘varṇamaṇṭha’ means

‘Sweetmeat of Letters. This is the reading of MS Jh. The Śrīkaṇṭhī reads kalāmoṭaṁ
‘Bundle of Energies’.

" Instead of mātrṛrodanam — the Crying of the Mothers — MSs Ch, J, Jh, Ñ T and D
read mātṛrodhanam — the Obstruction of (or by) the Mothers.

Read vidyunmān for vidyumān.
The Viṇāśikhātantra is a Vāmatantra. It has been edited and translated by Gaudriaan.
See bibliography.

The printed edition reads dvityikā (‘second’), MSs J, h, T and DḌ read dvitīyakā.
The Saṅmohana, Śiraścheda, Vīāśikhā and Nayoitara are a standard group of four
Vāmatantras. According to Sanderson, the Śiraśccheda (or Śiraccheda) is the name of
the first of the four ṣarkas of the Jayadrathayāmala. The following three, each about
6,000 verses long, appear to have been redacted independently in Kashmir and then
amalgamated (see Sanderson 2007: 235, 252 and 2005b: 278-283). The Nayottara is one


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


is said to be the eighth. These, O Goddess, are the Śikhā divisions spoken by

Unmatta. This is Sadāśiva’s wheel (cakra) divided into eight groups of eight.

The meaning is that (the corpus of scripture — sāstra), divided into these
(Tantras) with many diverse divisions, primary and secondary, is of many
kinds. As (is said) in the Śrīkaṇṭhī with regards to the face of Tatpuruṣa:
‘Initially, the heart of the Garuḍa (Tantras is formed) with twenty-eight
diviṣions.” Again: ‘the Bhūta Tantras are in the west . . .’. And ‘in the south is
the southern path, divided into twenty-four (Tantras).” Again: “What has

arisen from Vāmadeva is different (from those). Now listen to that.

of the sections of the Niḥśvāsatttvasaṁhitā, which is being edited. The association of

Tumburu, the Bhairava of the Vāma current, is made in the account in JY (1) of its
transmission (Dyczkowski 1988: 113). He is also the Bhairava of the Vīṇāśikhātantra.
The visualized form of Tumburu is described in the JY (1), which appears to have been
influenced by the Tantras of this current (see ibid. 149 n 181). See below, notes 1,292,
1,797 and 4,678.

See Dyczkowski 1988, 42-49 for an analysis of this list and a brief discussion of the

Tantras of the southern, that is ‘right hand’, mouth. In the later period, the Tantras came
to be thought of as forming a standard group of sixty-four, just as the Siddhāntāgamas
form a standard group of twenty-eight. The latter, which are more strictly Śaiva, are
associated with ‘subsidiary° Āgamas (upāgama), which are many more (see ibid.). The
former also are said to have ‘subsidiary Tantras’ (upatantra), although this designation
is much less common.

Read wth MSs K, J, Jh, Ñ T and Ḍ bhedopabhedanānāvaicitryātmanā for

bhedopabheda-vaicitryātmanā.

! Ibid. 220ab. The previous and the following references cannot be traced in the

version of the Śrīkaṇṭhī available.
Read as suggested by the editor of the printed text, sāmprataṁ for sāmṛtaṁ. The

western and eastern faces of Sadāśiva utter the Gāruḍa and Bhūta Tantras, respectively.

They are concerned with exorcism of ghosts and spirits (bhūta), countering snakebite

and other poisons. Recent research has uncovered a number of Gāruḍa Tantras amongst
Nepalese manuscripts. A representative text compiled from these types of Tantras is the
Krīyākālaguṇottara. 1 supervised the input of manuscripts of the Trottala and
Tortalotara for the Muktabodha Digital Library. These are available online. The
Tantrasaṁgraha by Nārāyaṇa is an extensive compendium of remedies for poison and
snakebite that draws from the Gāruḍatantras. Concerning the Gāruḍa and Bhūtatantras,
see Dyczkowski 1988: pp. 39-42, and Sanderson 2001: 14 n 13. An edition and study of
a part of the Kriyākālaguṇottara to which 1 brought attention for the first time in the

aforementioned publication, has been published recently by Slauber. The Bhairava
Tantras are spoken by the southem, right face. The left face, which is that of Vāmadeva,
speaks the Vāma Tantras (see above, note 6). Although influential at one time, only one

Vāma Tantra, namely, the Vīṇāśikhā, has been recovered. It seems that the first saṭka of
the Jayadrathaāyāmala has drawn substantially from Vāma Tantras. There we find a

deṭailed visualization of Tumburu Bhairava, the main deity of this class of Tantras. See
Dyczkowski 1988: pp. 36-38 and 149-150.
The Jñānapañcāśikā (op. cit. fl. la-1b) lists the the following Gāruḍatantras.
1) Hara 2) Huṁṅkāraka 3) Bindusāra 4) Kalāmṛta 5) Devatrāsa 6) Sūyāsa (?) 7) Śāvara

8) Kālasāvara 9) Pakṣirāja 10) Śikhāyoga 11) Śikhāsāra 12) Sikhāmṛta 13)

Pañcabhūta 14) Vibhāga 15) Śūnyabheda 16) Nīlakaṇṭha 17) Kālāga (> Kālāṅga) 18)

Kālakūṭa 19) Paṭaduma (> Paṭadhūma) 20) Kamboja 21) Kamvala 22) Kaṅka (?) 23)

TANTRĀLOKA

(The Tantra) refers (in this way to) another variety (of scriptures) with its

divisions, primary and secondary. (Moreover,) as each face has five faces, from
that division secondary divisions arise. In this way that is also included, and so
not discussed here separately. That has been said (in the Mālinīvijayavārtika):
‘Each face has five faces, from which it is said that there are countless
divisions of the ten and eighteen divisions.’
Thus, the teaching is that this corpus of scripture (śāstra) is of three
kinds, called Śiva, Rudra and Bhairava, which teach duality, unity-in-difference
and nonduality, respectively. That has been said (in the following lines):
‘He knew (this) Tantra called Rudra, Śiva and Bhairava to be of three

kinds. In reality this essence of knowledge (jñānasattā) unfolds as (teaching)

duality, unity-in-difference and, in the same way, as possessing (the teachings

concerning) nonduality (respectively).”

Although this corpus of scripture is in this way dualistic etc., having

encompassed (and assumed as His own) the remaining triad (trika) consisting
of the Supreme Lord’s (faces) Īśa, Vāma and Aghora which, as the abode of
Kālatuṇḍa 24) Kaṭāhaka 25) Suvarṇarekha 26) Sugrīva 27) Trotala and 28)

Troṇalottara.
Each of the other four faces has five faces, see Dyczkowski 1988 p. 31. The five

faces discussed here are those of Īśāna, that is, the upper face that speaks the

Mantratantra. See ibid. 32 ff.

MVV 1/378. Instead of daśāṣtadaśabhedasya tato bhedeṣv asaṅṁkhyatā the MVV
reads: daśāṣṭadaśabhīnnasya tato bhedair asaṁkhyatā, which means practically the
same. The countless ‘divisions’ of the twenty-eight Siddhāntāgamas are, presumably,
the so-called ‘secondary’ or ‘subsidiary, the Upāgamas.
MVV 1/391-392ab. MVV reads itthaṁ tantraṁ . . sthitaṁ tridhã (‘in this way the
Tantra is of three kinds’) for tantraṁ jajñe . . . idaṁ tridhā (‘he knew (this) Tantra to be

of three kinds’). The verses of the MVV (1/392cd-395ab), which are followed by those

aoled next, are worth noting: ‘In the same way there are three primary energies of
iva, namely, those beginning with the will (i.e., will, knowledge and action). There
itself, by (their) ongoing development, the five energies and the rest are conjoined (to
them). In this way, that Trika, which is in the midst (of them), is a separate (distinct)
teaching (śāṣtra) which, supreme in this way, originates from the tradition (karma) of
the lineage belonging to our teacher's house. Thus, because it is closely (related) to the
teachings (śāstra) (of the Tantras) of the Left and Right, a Kaula stream (of the
teachings) unfolds at the extremity of the culminating stream (of the scriptures).”

" Read with MSs J, Jh, Ñ and T iṣṭaṁ (‘the remaining ((Trika) triad)) for ṣaṣṭhaṁ
(‘the sixth’).” Cf. above, where Jayaratha says: ‘the remaining triad (śiṣṭasya trikasya)

of Īśa, Vāma and Aghora will be applied to a different task’.
! As a ‘remaining’ category of scriptures and their teachings, the Trika is here said to
be derived from the faces of Īśāna (= Īśa), Vāmadeva and Aghora that are above, to the

left and the right, and utter the Siddhānta, Vāma and Bhairava Tantras, respectively.
Elsewhere, Trika is said to be ‘the half in front’ (pūrvārdha) of the faces, which can
well be understood as being these three. Again, it is also said to be ‘above the upper”
(ārdhvordhva), which also makes sense in this perspective not only spatially, but as
being ‘above’ the others, because it contains their essence. For a more detailed
discussion see above, note 1,6, and Dyczkowski 1988: 174.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


rest of the three goddesses Parā (Parāparā and Aparā), encompasses

(it all), (the

Lord) floods it with the nectar of supreme nonduality, in accord with

statements as:

such

‘Juṣṭ as is the scent in a flower, oil in sesame seed, the soul (jīva) in the

body, and nectar in water, in the same way Kula is inwardly establis

the (Śaiva) scriptures (śāstra).”

hed in (all)

Read with MSs J, h, Ñ T and D ityādyuktyā for ityādyuttayā.

TĀ 35/34. 1t is quoted in the Mahārthamañjarī (p. 170), where Maheśvarānanda says

that it is ‘the view of the Tantrāloka’, without identifying its source. Instead of jale

rasaḥ, the reading there and below in 35/34 is jale ʻmṛtam, which agrees with that
of
MsSs K, J, Ih and T, and so has been adopted. Abhinaya says (below 35/33)
that he is
quoting this verse from the Kālīkula. According to Sanderson (2007: 375),
the Kālīkula
is “very probably° the Kaālīkulapañcaśataka (which Jayaratha calls
the
Devīpañcaśataka), of which the following passage I have edited from the manuscri
pts
of this unpublished work appears to be paraphrased here by Abhinavagupta.

etad rahasyaṁ paramaṁ kulaṁ jñãtaṁ na kenaci |

Śśaivād bāhyam idaṁ deva pañcasrotovivarjitam [k, kh, g: -śrotra-] || 35 ||
daśāṣṭādaśabhedasya śaivasya parameśvara |
antarlīnam [k, kh, g: antalī-] idaṁ jñānaṁ na jñātaṁ tridaśeśvaraiḥ ||
36 ||

sarvatra saṁsthitaṁ deva sugūḍhaṁ [k, kh: sugūḍhe, g: sugāḍhai] kulam uttamamm ḷ
puṣpe [g: puṣpai] gandha ivāsaktas [kh g: -śaktaṣ] tailaṁ [k: melaṁ; g: tairaṁ] yadvat

tilādiṣu || 37 ||
10kh-a, 9g-a) tathaiva sarvaśāstrāṇāṁ [k, kh: -naṁ,; g: -ṣāstrānāṁ]
kulam ante
pratiṣṭhitam |

‘This supreme secret which is Kula is not known by anybody. O god, this
is
outside the Śaiva (teachings) of the ten and eighteen divisions (of the Siddhānt
as) and is
devoid of (division into) five currents (of scripture). Ó Supreme Lord, this
knowledge,
which is unknown (even to) the gods, is that and is merged inwardly.
O god, the most
excellent and well-hidden Kula (teaching,) it is present everywhere like scent
present in
a flower or oil in sesame seeds and the like, in the same way Kula
is inwardly
established within all the (Śaiva) scriptures (śāstra).’ 2/35-38ab
context:

For the reader's convenience, the verse Jayaratha quotes is presented here

in

‘AIl (the various learned and spiritual traditions, be they) worldly science

(laukika), Vedic, the Sāṁkhya, Yoga and the like, (the Vaiṣṇava) Pañcarātr
a, Buddhiṣṭ,
Jain, logic (nyāyaśāstra), grammar, (the dualist Śaiva) Siddhāntatantras
and Śākta
(Tantras) etc., are all born from the (five) Brahmās, distinguished from one
another as

Sadyojāta and the rest (of Sadāśiva’s five faces), as is taught in the venerabl

e

Svacchandatantra and other (scriptures). (26-27) . . . Therefore,
there is only one
tradition in which every (tradition) is grounded, starting from the mundane
(Vedic)
scriptures, to that of the Vaiṣṇavas and the Buddhists, (up to) that of the
Śaivas.
The ultimate goal and abode of that (Śaiva tradition) is called Trika. (31ab)
That same
(tradition) is said to be Kula, because it is not divided by anything and (never)
ceases (to
exist, and s0 cannot be sublated by a higher teaching). Just as in all the limbs
of the
body, whether superior or inferior, each distinct from one another, there
is (only) one to

which life is imparted, just so, as scripture (declares), (the Kaula) Trika is present in
all
(the scriptures and all things). (31cd-32)

TANTRĀLOKA

Otherwise (if Śiva’s essential and supreme nondual nature were not
present in all the scriptures), they would not (serve as a) mean (nimitta) to
attaining the supreme plane (of existence). That has been said (in the
Mālinīvijayavārtika):
‘Thus, moreover, Bhairava, within whom (all) the limitations of

phenomena have been withdrawn and so is completely full to overflowing, His
power reinforced by the Sound (rava) arising from ultimate reality,® embraces
the three energies. (These are) the Trika (triad) beginning with Aparā and

ending with Parā, present respectively within those (faces), namely, Iśāna,

Vāma, and (Aghora) on the right. (And having done so,) He abides (as such,

that is, as the consort of these three Goddesses and as the possessor of their

powers).

The Tantras of the Upper, Left and the other (Right current) as well as

the Kulas, which are established in the culmination of that flow (of scriptures

and teachings), bestow the plane of nonduality.’

And (this is) declared in the venerable Kālīkula that, ‘devoid of the five
currents (of scriptures), it is said to be the essence of the (two) groups (bheda) of ten and
eighteen (Siddhāntāgamas). Juṣt as is the scent in a flower, oil in sesame seed, the soul
(jīva) in the body, and nectar in water, in the same way Kula is inwardly established in
(all) the (Saiva) scriptures (śāstra).’ (33-34) (TĀ 35/26-27, 30-34) See Dyczkowski

1992a: 313 and SvTT 8/28-31ab, 11/43cd-45ab, 11/179cd-182.

Read with the MVV, paramārthodyadrava- for paramārthodyaddava-. Instead of —

Śśaktikaḥ (power) the MVV reads —vṛttikaḥ (state or activity).
! The MVV reads ‘avatiṣṭhate’ instead of trikaṁ sthitaḥ, which does not change the

meaning, but eliminates ‘rikaṁ’, which qualifies the three Goddesses Aparā etc. as the
‘Trika (triad)’. I have retained this reading because this surely is the point, namely, that

the Trika triad is present in the three faces. Aparā is the hidden energy of Iśāna, the

upper face, which the Siddhānta Āgamas declare to be their source, considering

themselves to be the ‘upper’, most elevated scriptures. These, considered to be dualist,
along with those of the faces of Vāmadeva to the left, and Aghora to the right, which are

considered to be dual-cum-nondualist and nondualist, respectively, are believed to be

permeated by Kaula Tṛika teachings. These are not just nondualistic, as are the
scriptures spoken by Aghora (i.e. the 64 Bhairava Tantras), they are supremely nondual,
a ṭypical characterization of the Trika teachings, and indeed of Kaula ones in general.
Trika teachings, here identified with the most elevated Kula teachings, need not have a
separate current of scripture, as their teachings are present in the other Tantras. There
they present themselves as particularly special, powerful, and secret teachings in a

Tantra which is itself secret. Here an additional dimension is added, which is discussed
in the following paragraph. The teachings are ‘āgama,’ in the more literal sense of the
term, as a tradition that has ‘come down’ through the lineage of teachers. The written

Āgamas are also such, but in this case what has ‘come downʼ is an oral tradition. This is
the reason why they are not seen in the written Āgamas. But this view leads to the
question which follows.

MVV.

1/395cd-396ef

and

398.

MVV

reads

rādhāny

bhedasaṁkocahānaye (‘(the Kulas) are established in this flow in order to destroy the
contraction of duality°) for taddhāraprāntarūḍhāni prāpayyābhedabhūmikām (‘those
that are established in the culmination of that flow (of scriptures and teachings and)

bestow the plane of nonduality°).


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Surely, (someone may object,) no such scriptural teaching (śruti) is

perceived (to exist), so what is the authority (for this view)? Surely, he
(Abhinavagupta) himself has stated that the authority here (in this case) is (the

teaching) of the lineage of teachers. As he says (in the Mālinīvijayavārtika);:

‘In this way, in the midst (of the energies and scriptures,) that Trika

(triad) (that is divided up as the three classes of Tantras etc. and) separate
(from them) (vibhinna) is supreme. The teaching (śāstra) is present in our

teacher’s house by virtue of the transmission of the lineage (of teachers)

(sampradāyakrama).’

Surely, (an opponent may raise) the objection that this (doctrine), which
has sprung from human intellect (and so has no scriptural source), has been
made into the answer. This is (indeed) a novel kind of erudition. Thus,
traditional doctrine (āgama), whatever it may be, should be confirmed (by
scripture) so that this (question may be satisfactorily) answered. (To which we
reply that that is) not so. Traditional doctrine (āgama) (both written and oral
does not require validation, as it) is said to be that which is commonly accepted
(prasiddhī) (knowledge) and is free of contradictions (avigīrā). As is said:
‘Traditional doctrine (āgama) is that which is commonly accepted
belief (prasiddhi) in the world, whether it is accompanied by sound argument
(yuktimat) or otherwise. As it is devoid of contradiction, it is the authority

(pramāṇa) concerning knowledge as well as ignorance. What is commonly
accepted (prasiddhi) and free of contradictions (avigīrā) (in this sense) is

considered to be the Goddess of Speech, Who is the truth (itself). That which is

proved (siddha) in this way should be accepted by those who are free of

doubts.”

The term ‘śrutī commonly refers to the Vedic scriptures. In this case as elsewhere,

Jayaratha uses the term to refer to the original revelation of the Tantras. See below,
notes 1,293 and 1,477.

For the context, see the previous verse, quoted above.
“ MVV 1/393¢d-394ab. Read with MVV paraṁ tathā for tathā tathā. Īn addition to
whatis stated, we may also understand that there is an allusion here to the diverse forms
of Trika represented in its various scriptural sources. The variant forms of the Trident

maṇḍala Abhinava describes in chapter 31 are indicative in this respect. We know from
Abhinava’s many references that, for example, the Devyāyāmala taught a variety of
Trika that maintained the supremacy of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, the goddess of the Krama
(below, 29/57cd), although it taught the worship of the same maṇḍala, and was

therefore undoubtedly a Trika Tantra (see below, ad 15/462cd-466 (15/460-463)).

However, the question which follows here suggests, as we have noted, that Abhinava, at
least as Jayaratha understands him, is particularly concerned with the oral Trika
tradition. Accordingly, although the word śāstra may be understood to mean a text or a
corpus, itis translated here with the general term ‘teachingʼ.

ḷ Scripture is the teaching that is commonly accepted, and the accompanying reflective

awareness. This is the subject of chapter thirty-five below. Parts of these verses are

quoted below in TĀv ad 35/1cd-2ab, IPv vol.

p. 39 and ĪPv vol. 2, p. 89, where the

reading of the last line is tayā yatra yadā siddhaṁ etad grāhyam asaṁśayam (that

which is proved by that (Goddess of Speech) wherever and whenever should be

TANTRĀLOKA

And that (commonly accepted knowledge) is present here (in this
teaching) and devoid of contradiction. It belongs to great souls, that is, the great
teachers. So what is the purpose of searching for other authorities (pramāṇa)
here (in this case)? One cannot simply say that because this kind of scriptural
teaching (śruti) has not reached the ears of those who maintain materialist views

(cārvāgdṛk) and are devoid of insight into (the true nature of) fettered existence

(bhava); that is unreasonable. Just because there is no authoritative means of
knowledge (pramāṇa), (that does not mean that the reality which is its) object

should also not exist. Nor are these (teachers liars, who) deceive (others) that

they should teach in this way what is otherwise (than the truth), because (we)

see that the application (prayoga) of all the sense of the traditional doctrine
(āgamārtha) of the Śaiva corpus of scripture (śāstra) has this teaching

(upadeśa) as its root. Thus, just as the Vedic revelation (sśruti), which is the root

(authority for the performance) of the Aṣṭaka and other (Vedic) sacrifices, is
considered to be present in Manu and the other smṛtis, because therein is the

root of a closely related tradition (śākhā), one should know that such is the case

(tathā) here also (with the Tantras). Without having seen (dṛṣrvā) an original
revelation (sruti) like this, (these teachers), who have experienced directly the

accepted without doubt’) instead of tathā yatra siddhaṁ tad grāhyam aviśaṅkitaiḥ
(‘That which is proved (siddha) in this way should be accepted by those who are free of
doubts.”)
In general terms, the expression ‘what is commonly accepted (prasidhi) and
free of contradictions (avigītā) refers to the basis of all scripture. Thus, Kṣemarāja
(comm. on SvT 5/88) explains:

‘Moreover, such is whatever is said in the scripture of the Supreme Lord,

which is a dialogue (between the Deity and one who questions it,) from which-mamy
fruits are obtained, such as ‘nourishment’ etc. and ‘tranquillity etc., and each and eyery
thing that has been clarified by the observance of that (practice) which should be

observed, (as taught) by the series of teachers who have perceived (that reality). (That
dialogue) has as its authority the insight (pratīti) that (the teaching) is impelled by the

omniscient (Śiva, the) Great Lord, Who is proved to exist (siddha) by what is commonly

accepted (prasiddhī) and free of contradictions (avigītā), which is the understanding of

all who are enlivened by the entire business of daily life.’

More specifically, Jayaratha is referring here to the oral tradition, which has the
same validity as the written scriptures, for the same reason. This is how Abhinava

explains this verse in his commentary (vimarśinī) on the Recognition of the Lord
(tsvarapratyabhijñā): ʻThe relationship (between the teacher and the taught) is the
lineage of the series of teachers. This (verse) indicates that (the teaching) commonly
accepted by the great teachers is the root (one). Nor should one doubt that, being such, it
should not be accepted. (Indeed,) it is (the teaching) that should be supremely accepted
as the great secret. The teachings of great secrets have come down (orally transmitted)

‘from ear to ear’. However, they have been set down to writing in the scriptures that
deal with great secrets by certain very compassionate (teachers). But even so, they

continue to be secrets. (This is s0) because one sees that these teachings also are not

ignored. That is said (with the following words): “What is commonly accepted

(prasiddhi) and free of contradictions (avigītā) (in this sense) is considered to be the
Goddess of Speech (Herself), who is true.” (IPv vol. 1 p. 39) See below, note 35,9 for
the commentary that follows.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


entire Śaiva traditional doctrine (āgama) along with its (essential) reality, would

not teach in this way (if it were not true).” Now enough of this ill-mann

ered

testing of the teachings of great masters!
Sureḷy, (one may ask,) it is said of the scriptures that: ‘as they have all

come from Śiva, they (all) beṣtow the fruit of Śiva’s abode. So, i according

to this, the fruit (namely, Śiva’s Abode) and its determining cause, that

is, the

unity (of the Śaiva scriptures), are one (that is, are both always one and the

same, whatever be the school to which the Śaiva scripture belongs), then

what is

said to be the basis of their being many (scriptures leading to various levels of

realisation) in this way? (Our reply to this question is that) this is true. (The

scriptures do really have only one purport and fruit), however, due to the

difference of disposition (āśaya) of those who are the objects of (Śiva’s) grace,

they are conceived (kalpita) to be many (and different). As is said (in the
Mālinīvijayavārtika);
‘The purpose of all of this (revelation) is to impel (to action) in accord

with the differences of those who hear (the teachings). This difference, which

is

due to the difference of the goal (artha) (various aspirants have), is (only)
metaphorically conceived. One should not conceive that there is a difference

here in the fruit; if (this supposed difference) were conceivable, (the differenc

would be just a notion, and s0) not in accord with reality.

e

. In the Vedic ambience, the Vedas are considered to be the original revelation which,
as such, is termed ‘“śruṁī’, which literally means ‘that which has been heardʼ. Later

literature such as the Law Books (dharmaśāstra), for example the one aṭtributed
to
Manu, although not original revelation is considered to be directly related
to it as
‘smṛtī’, which literally means ‘that which has been recollected’. The Purāṇas
are also
considered to be smṛti, thus affiliating them to the Vedic revelation. This claim
was
made for the Tantras also centuries after Jayaratha who, on the contrary, is careful
not to
do so. However, he does invoke the principle that justifies the authoritativeness
of the
smṛtis, because they are considered to be closely related to the Veda, although they
are,

in fact, a quite separate corpus of literature. The teachers of the Śaivāgama knew them
well. Although not Veda, these traditions are considered to be rooted in the same
truth
and are authoritative for that reason. The great teachers of the Śaiva revelation in

witnessing their truth witnessed all the truth, including that of the Vedas.
In order for
that to be possible, they themselves must have been truthful.
MVV 2/290cd.

MVV 2/275-276ab.

sarvam etat pravṛttyarthaṁ śrotRṇāṁ tu vibhedataḥ |

arthabhedāt tu bhedo 'yam upacārāt prakalpyate |1275||

phalabhedo na kalpyo ‘tra kalpyaśced ayathāyatham |

In the previous line of the Mālinīvijayavārtika, Abhinava tells us that these
words are spoken by Śrīkaṇṭha in the Kiraṇaśāsana i.e. the Kiraṇatantra. Indeed,
it is

found in KiT 10/30cd-31ab, where we read:

puṅpravṛtter ayaṁ bhedaḥ A: tatra bhedas tathā mataḥ / B: śroṭṟbhedas tathā mataḥ

phalabhedo na (B: phalabhedena) kalpyo ‘tra jñānabhedaḥ prakalpyate |
‘This variety (bheda) (of the scripture) is to impel man (to action). A) The
variety there is considered to be such, B) The variety in the current (of scriptures
) is

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely, (one may ask that) if this is so, does this mean that, in actual
fact, it would be unreasonable (to maintain that the types of scriptures and their
corresponding schools) are really (relatively) superior (or inferior to one
another), as the case may be, as sayings such (as the following) declare?
‘(The scripture of the) Śaiva (Siddhānta) is superior to the Vedas and
the like; the Left and Right (currents of Tantras are superior to the) Śaiva; Kaula
is superior to the (Tantras of the) Right. There is no (scripture) greater than

(Our reply to this question is that this is) not so, because what is said

(here) is that, insofar as (they are related to each other) as leading from one to

the other, (lower scriptures) are related (to higher ones) as is the means to the

goal. Thus, the culmination (of this progression) is the corpus of scripture
(śāṣtra) which establishes the teaching of supreme nonduality alone (eva), and
its one fruit is the attainment of the essence of Śiva’s being. That very

(corpus. i.e. Tṛrika,) is the most excellent because it is the direct means

(sākṣādupāya) to attain the supreme plane. And that has been explained

extensively

by

this

same

(writer,

Abhinavagupta,)

in

the

venerable

considered to be such. One should not conceive that there is a difference here in the
fruit. What is conceived is the diversity of the knowledge (they impart).

The lines that follow in the MVV are also worth quoting: “This, (the scripture)
of the pervasive Lord (vibhu), is divided into divisions of ten, eighteen and eight times
eight. The one fruit (of it all) is the attainment of Śiva’s essential nature within the
individual soul who is zealous to attain that and is competent for it, with no
consideration of caste, family or colour etc.” Ibid. 2/276cd-277

! The first quarter of this verse is quoted below in TĀv ad 8/32cd-35ab. The full verse

is quoted by Kṣemarāja in the SvTu ad 11/74c. 11/74cd states that sarvādhvano
viniṣkrāntaṁ śaivānāṁ tu paraṁ padam || — ‘the supreme plane which has come forth

out of all the path is that of the Śaivas’. Kṣemarāja explains that this is said in this verse
‘with the intention of establishing a wonderful subsidiary variety of scriptures spoken by
Śiva. . . . Here the word ‘Śaiva’ refers to the scriptures of the Siddhānta beginning with

the Kiraṇatantra, which bestows Śiva’s transcendental (anuttīrna) plane.’

Sen Sharma says in the intro. (p. 4) to his edition of the Matsyendrasaṁhitā
that this verse is drawn from the Kulārṇavatantra. The closest to this verse there is:
sarvebhyaś cottamā vedā vedebhyo vaiṣṇavaṁ param |
vaiṣṇavād uttamaṁ śaivaṁ śaivād dakṣiṇam uttamam ||
dakṣiṇād uttamaṁ vāmaṁ vāmāt siddhāntam uttamam |
siddhāntād uttamaṁ kaulaṁ kaulāt parataraṁ na hi l| 2/7-8
(The statement ṣaḍdarśanāni me ʻṅgāni (2/84a) indicates the Kulārṇava was written

after the ‘six philosophies’ became a standard set.
" The point Jayaratha is making is that one is led progressively from the dualist
position to a nondualist one through the scriptures in such a way that the systems they
teach, ranging from dualist to nondualist, serve as the means and the end to one another,
until one reaches the supreme means, which is the end in itself, i.e. Trika, when one
finally attains to the very Being of Śiva.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Maālinīślokavārttika and elsewhere (ādi). Thus one should understand that for

oneself from that same (book). Every syllable is not proved to be in agreement

(with the teaching) for fear of the book (becoming too) big. Thus, they say: ‘the
essence of (the scriptures) is the Trika śāstra.’ That is said (in the following
verse);
‘After the Veda comes Śaiva (i.e., Śaivasiddhānta), then Vāma (the

Tantras of the Left Current), then Dakṣa (the Tantras of the Right Current), then

Kula, then Mata, and then after that also comes Trika which, the best of all, is

supreme.”


With the same intended (meaning, we read in the Niśācāra):


‘A teacher who knows the (nature of the) supreme reality (which is his
goal), although he has been consecrated in the Path of the Left, needs
(nonetheless) to be initiated into the Bhairava (Tantras), and he too (needs to

take further initiations) into Kula, Kaula, and (then finally) also into Trika.

‘-Elsewhere’ most probably refers to the Śrāpāūrvapañcikā. See Appendix volume
concerning sources and references under this entry.
' This and the following verse are quoted by Abhinava in the PTv p. 92. A variant of

the first of these verses is quoted again by Jayaratha below in TĀv ad 13/300cd-301.
There Mata comes after Dakṣa, then after that comes Kula and Kaula, followed by


Trika. Thus there it reads:


vedāc chaivaṁ tato vāmaṁ tato dakṣaṁ tato matam |
tataḥ kulaṁ tataḥ kaulaṁ trikaṁ sarvottamaai param ||

‘After the Veda comes Śaiva (i.e. Śaivasiddhānta), then Vāma (the Tantras of

the Left Current), then Dakṣa (the Tantras of the Right Current), then Mata and then
Kula, then Kaula and Trika which, the best of all, is supreme.

The verse here and in PTv p. 92 reads:

vedāc chaivaṁ tato vāmaṁ tato dakṣaṁ tataḥ kulam |

tato mataṁ tataś cāpi trikaṁ sarvottamaṁ param ||

' This verse is quoted without variants in TĀv ad 447cd-48 and ad 13/300cd-301. This

and the following verse are quoted by Abhinava in the PTv p. 92, where he refers to
another source, perhaps Somānanda’s lost commentary on the PT, as saying: ʻṭhe
sequence is this one. As has been said: “what is present in all these stages (bhūmī), that
is, profane treatises, the Veda, Siddhānta, the Left, Right, Kula and Mata, is the
ultimately real perceiver.” Cf. previous note.

This verse is also quoted below in TĀv ad 13/302 (see note there). Abhinava quotes
itin the PTv p. 92, where he says that it is from the Niśācāra, as does Jayaratha here.

In some cases, Mata precedes Kula, which is followed by Kaula, which is not
mentioned in this verse but appears below in this order. The scriptures of the Siddhānta
are generically termed ‘Śaiva’, as they are considered to be the common universal

(sāmānya) Śaiva practice. Those of the Left are the Vāma Tantras mentioned above.
Those of the Right, as we have seen, are the Bhairava Tantras. Kula means, presumably,
first of all the Kaula elements present in these Tantras, understood as inner, more secret
teachings of the Bhairava Tantras, that is, the Kula practice (kulācāra) or ‘modality”
(prakriyā) embedded in the Bhairava Tantras, which ultimately developed into

scriptures (kulāgama) in their own right. It is possible that Mata refers to the teachings

TANTRĀLOKA

This and more are said in the venerable Niśācāra (Tantra) and in other
(Tantras). Moreover, that (i.e., Trika) is also of three kinds, because it consists

of three parts, called the Śiddhā, Nāmaka (or Anāmaka) and Mālinī (Tantras).
There, the Siddhātantra is predominantly (concerned with ritual) action, the
Nāmaka Tantra with knowledge, and the (teaching of the) Mālinīmata consists

of both (ritual action and knowledge), and so that is the main (scripture). As he
said: ‘the essence of that (Trika śāstra) is the Mālinīmata.’ Similarly, it is

rightly said: ‘there is nothing here (in the Tantrāloka) not (taught by the

God of gods in the venerable Mālinīvijayottara)’

Thus, as (the Mālinīvijayottara is a Trika Tantra, īit possesses the

necessary) qualification (adhikāra) (to teach) that, because it tolerates all
(sarvaṁsaha) (the teachings of the lower Śaiva scriptures also, and so also) it is

reasonable (to assert that) the consequence (nirvāha) of the original proposition

of the Matatantras, of which the main one was considered to be the Brahmayāmala (see
above, note 1,275). Certainly, one of the features of the BY is that, despite its

predominantly Śākta orientation, the esoteric Śākta Kula as a separate category of
teachingsis practically absent. Thisis simply because the strongly Kāpālika Mata of the

BY precedes it. Even so, one can perceive in the light of subsequent developments many
features of them already emerging in this, one of the earliest Bhairava Tantras. One of
the most striking is the use of the term ‘Kula’ as denoting the eight ‘families’ — kula — of
deities associated with the eight Mothers (mātṛkā). Although this asso

on is not

stressed in later developments, it serves to explain, in part at least, the origin of the term.

Possibly ‘Kula’ here refers to early Kula teachings, when they were still perceived as
deeper esoteric teachings, such as those of Kālīkula (also called Kālīkrama), in its early

stage when still embedded within the procedures and rites (kalpa, vidhi) of the extensive

Jayadrathayāmala. We may take Kaula (literally ‘belonging to Kula’, i.e. produced by

Kula,) as the product of these earlier esoteric Kula teachings, that is, the independent
Kaula scriptures and traditions. Another possible way of understanding the distinction
between Kula and Kaula is that the latter stressed interiorization and transcendence of
opposites through intense empowerment. We find Kālīkula sources and the Kaula
Kubjikā Tantras referring to their traditions as ‘kulakaula’ perhaps to indicate that they
span both approaches — the outer literal enactment of ritual and pilgrimage and their
interiorization into the maṇḍala and the body. For a detailed analysis, see Dyczkowski

2009: intro. 2, p. 324 ff.
In this reference it is possible that in the expression kule kaule trike pi, Kula
and Kaula are adjectives of Trika, or perhaps just Kaula is. In the MVV (1/398),
Abhinava declares that Trika rises above the many Kula Tantras (kulāni). However,
there is no reference there to Kaula as a separate category. Certainly Trika is Kaula.
Abhinava is proud to be a Kaula. It is thus quite possible that we should read kaule trike

as ‘into Kaula Tṛika’.
! Concerning the SYM, see Appendix volume concerning sources and references under
this entry. The Nāmakatantra, which some have suggested may have actually been

called Anāmaka, has not been recovered, if it existed. Nor has the Mālinī or Mālinīmata.
It probably never existed, but whether it did or not, if it is identified with the
Maālinīvijaya it is the mythic precursor of the Mālinīvijayottara mentioned there. See

MV 1/8cd-13, quoted below in TĀv ad 9/7.

' Above, 1/17 and 1/18.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


(pratijñā), (namely, that the Mālinīvijayotara explicitly or implicitly contains

all the forms of Śaiya teachings,) is sound. He says (this, as follows):

ato ʻtrāntargataṁ sarvaṁ saṁpradé
hitair budhaiḥ |
adṛṣṭaṁ prakaṭīkurmo gurunāthājñayā vayam || 19 ||

Thus, at the command of (our) master and protector (gurunātha),

we will elucidate all that is contained herein that has not been seen

(adṛṣṭa)” by the learned
(saṁpradāyojjhita).

who

are

devoid

of

the

tradition

‘Thus’, because, for the aforementioned reason, this very scripture

(śāstra) is the (main) fundamental one, ‘we will elucidate’ (it) by means of

(this) treatise (prakriyā). Thus the point is that, (as they say): ‘the effort

exerted in what is (most) fundamental (pradhāna) is fruitful.’ (He says) ‘aṭt

the

command of (our) master and protector (gurunātha)’, because without that
command (ājñā) there would be no authority (adhikāra) here (to expound the

teaching). This is the point.

See above note 1,224 above.

Abhinava cannot be referring to more than one teacher (pace Gnoli) nor would it
make sense for the teacher to whom he refers be other than the one who belongs to the

tradition he is presenting. There is little room to doubt, therefore, that ‘gurunātha’ is

Śambhunātha, his Trika teacher.

Abhinava must be referring here, as Jayaratha says, to the Mālinīvijayottara rather

than all the Śaiva scriptures which, as their essence, it contains. Thus, by elucidating ‘all

that is contained’ in the MV, he is also elucidating all the scriptures. Those who do not
belong to the tradition, i.e. those who have not received initiation into Trika, would not
have been allowed even to see it. Another better way of understanding this statement is
that it refers to those others who have been initiated into other Trika lineages, not the
one transmitted by Śambhunātha. Directed by him, Abhinava discers all the Śaiva
teachings in the MV, although not all are evidently stated. Others did not. Thus, much
was omitted by them. Abhinava makes up for this in this commentary on the MV, the

Tantrāloka.
" Emend adṛstaṁ to adṛṣṭaḥ.
‘Abandonedʼ, ‘left, ‘discontinued’ or ‘rejected’ is the literal meaning of ujjhita.
Again, this attributive compound could equally be translated as meaning that those to
whom it refers have ‘been abandoned by the tradition’ or have left the tradition’. Either
way, they are devoid of it.

In this case, the term ‘prakriyā’ is used in a non-technical sense to mean simply ‘a

workʼ or ‘tṛeatiseʼ, not in the technical sense of a modality of practice, concerning

which see above, note 1,203.
The ‘command’ of a deity or teacher is not just an order to do something. It is also an

empowerment to do it. To receive such a command is like receiving a descent of
the
power of grace (śaktipāta) or to be penetrated by the deity’s power. When one receives
it, one is empowered, and so is given the authority (adhikāra) to do what has
been

commanded. Concerning the many implications of the term ‘qjñā’ — ‘command’, see

TANTRĀLOKA

The Lord’s grace (bhagavatprasāda) alone is the instrumental means

(nimitta) by which what has been seen by others can be elucidated and within

oneself (to do it). In order to make this known, he says:

f:

[ĒEEEPTUE:TItz

fsrrFcrrrsfttf̄=sT: 11 301

abhinavaguptasya kr̥tiḥ
seyaṁ yasyoditā gurubhir ākhyā |
trinayanacaraṇasaroruhacintanalabdhaprasidádhir iti || 20 ||
This is the work of Abhinavagupta who, as declared by (his)

teachers, is a man who has attained the most excellent accomplishment
(and fame) (prasiddhi) by reflecting (and meditating) on (cintana) the

lotus feet of (his teacher, the) Three-Eyed One.

The point is — what is not attainable by one who has attained the most
excellent accomplishment by the grace of the Three-Eyed One?
Dyczkowski 2009 intro. vol. 1, pp. 197 ff., where the meaning of the term is explored in
detail.

The word ‘prasiddhi’ may mean, amongst other things, both ‘fame’ and ‘excellent
accomplishment’. As Abhinava was probably not well-known when he wrote his

Tantrāloka but ‘destined for future greatness’ (TĀ 37/79), the latter meaning is to be
stressed. In a technical sense, prasiddhi denotes the kind of intuitive sense that is the

basis of common belief and the capacity to understand anything. In this case,
particularly scripture. I have translated the word as Jayaratha glosses it, i.e., ‘most

excellent accomplishment’. However, the technical sense may well have been
uppermost in Abhinava’s mind. This is further supported by the sense of cintana, which

can also mean thinking about the meaning of scripture, or indeed, the words of the

teacher. In that case he is saying that he has ‘aṭtained the capacity of insight into the
meaning of the teachings and beliefin them by reflecting / thinking / cogitating on them

at the feet of the teacher whois Śiva Himself.’
MSs K, Ch, J read -sadodita- (‘constantly°) for —saroruha- (‘lotus’). The meaning

would then be that Abhinava attained this by ‘by reflecting (and meditating) constantly

on the feet of (his teacher, the) Three-Eyed One’.
Lord Śiva is frequently called the Three-Eyed One, so it seems at first sight that

Abhinavais referring to Him here. However, the feet to which Abhinava refersin the
other verses (16 and 21) are those of his Trika master Śambhunātha and his consort. Itis
from them that the knowledge of the Trika lineage flows (16), andis the light that
enlightened him (21). Śambhu is a common name of Śiva the Three--Eyed One, although
Jayaratha, it seems, has not grasped the pun (sleṣa); it is clear that Abhinavais again
praising his teacher here, not just Śiva. Abhinava praised his deitiesin the beginning, it

makes no sense for him to suddenly do so again in the course of praising his teacher. It
is normal to see one’s teacher as deity. Cf. above, note 1,203.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Moreover, in order to establish that this work (and what it teaches) can
be taken up (and understood) in this same way (evam) by everybody, he says:

JīTJTNTTĀTĀTITTITTĪTTITĀgTT]

śrīśambhunāthabhāskara-

caraṇanipātaprabhāpagatasaṅkocam |
abhinavaguptahr̥dambujam
etad vicinuta maheśapūjanahetoḥ || 21 ||

In order to worship Maheśa (the Great Lord), discern (vicinuta)
this, the lotus of Abhinavagupta’s heart, that has blossomed by the light
falling from the feet™ of the sun-like Śambhunātha.
Viciṇuta literally means ‘separate out’, that s, ‘analyse.

The expression I have translated as ‘blossomed’ is apagatasaṅkoca ,which literally
means ‘from which contraction has been removed’. The contraction meant here is not

just that of consciousness. Here it may also mean shyness or reticence. Those who are
truly great in spiritual and in other ways are not overconfident in their own abilities.
What confidence they have comes by grace. It is with this kind of confidence that
Abhinava undertakes this great work. The analogy also clearly refers to spiritual

inspiration. Abhinava expressly refers to ‘the example of the sun and the lotus’ as

referring to the light that comes from a true Trika teacher that causes the lotus of the

heart to blossom, unlike the light of other lower teachers, which is a much dimmer light,
like that of the moon (below, 23/45cd-76).

Instead of translatixg ‘caraṇanipāta-’ as ‘falling from the feet’, one could equally

correctly translate it as ‘falling at the feet’ (as Sanderson has done 2005b: 122).
Assuming the latter, the lotus of Abhinavagupta’s heart bloomed by the light that
touched it when he fell at the feet of his Trika teacher Śambhunātha. Both senses may
be intended simultaneously. A variant found in manuscript J supports the alternative
translation. There instead of the reading prabhāpagatasaṁṅkocam (‘has blossomed by
the light (falling from the feet)), we find prabhāvagatasaṁkocam as ‘has blossomed by

the power (of falling at the feet)ʼ.

This verse is also found (without variants) at the beginning of the Tantrasāra
(v. 3). A note there contains the following explanation of this verse, which supports this

transḻaton: ‘The venerable Śambhunātha is the teacher of the author, who taught him

Trika (trikaśāstra). It is he alone who is the ‘sun’ which is the Supreme Soul and the sun
(itself). His two feet, that are knowledge and action, are the rays and feet. By the falling
of those (rays), the contraction of the lotus of Abhinavagupta’s heart has been removed
by the effulgence of (their) light, and it shines by virtue of the continuous expansion

(‘blooming’) of its own essential nature. Just as a lotus blossoms by the falling of the
sun’s rays (on it at dawn), in the same way (Abhinavagupta’s) heart has blossomed by
the light of the venerable Śambhunātha’s feet, and the teaching (śāstra) in its essential
characteristic has come forth from that. Thus, the essential nature of the Light is the
reflective awareness of its own nature. It is described in this way. One should ‘discern
that’. The worship of Maheśa is the recognition as his being one’s own nature. It is

TANTRĀLOKA

The ‘heart’ is the (very) Self (ātman) of scripture and the reality (it
teaches). (The most elevated and authentic) worship of Maheśvara (Śiva, the

Great Lord) is the recognition (of all things and Deity) as being one’s own
nature by the progressive process (karma) (of exercising) each of the forms of

insight (jñapti) that will be explained (here in the Tantrāloka), īn accord with
the teaching (imparted by the Vijñānabhairava) that:

‘(Real) worship (pūjā) is not (performed just by offering) flowers and
the like. It is that which makes the intuitive mind (mati) firm (and stable) in the
Supreme Sky (of transcendental consciousness), free of thought constructs. By
the devout (performance of) that (kind of) worship (the mind) dissolves

away.

because of that that this discernment has as its fruit the recognition (of one’s own nature

as) Maheśvara. This is the meaning. The general intended sense is — once one has
atṭained the state of Maheśvara, what is the use of (any) other fruit?”
Towards the end of his career, Abhinava expresses his gratitude to his manty

teachers
in
a
similar
way
when
he
writ
nānāgurupravarapādanipātajātasaṁvitsaroruhavikāsaniveśitaśrīḥ:
‘beautified by the blooming of the lotus of (his) consciousness by (his) falling
at the feet of various excellent teachers.” (IPVV vol. 3 p. 405)
Kṣemarāja uses the same metaphor to praise Abhinavagupta, who was his only
acknowledged teacher, at the beginning of his commentary (verse 6) on the

Svacchandatantra, where he says:

abhinavabodhādityadyutivikasitahr̥tsarojān me |
rasayata sarasāḥ parimalamasārasaṁsāravāsanāśāntyai l|
‘May the fragrance of the lotus of my heart that has blossomed by the light of
the sun of the (ever-) new consciousness (of Abhinavagupta) delight with aesthetic
sentiment those who possess it, in order to quell the latent tendencies of transmigratory

existence, which has no essence.”
" The forms of liberating insight (jāapti) are No Means and the three categories of
means to realization (upāya) which Abhinava expounds, one at a time, in chapters two
to five. These are then taught through and as the many practices and ritual procedures of
the remaining part of the Tantrāloka. See below, 1/247ab-247cd (1/246cd-247ab).

VBh 147 (145), also quoted below in TĀv ad 4/121cd-122ab. Śivopādhyāya

comments: “mahāvyomni paracitprakāśe, ādarāt śraddhāprakarṣāt, yo layo viśrāntiḥ,
sā yasmāt pūjā tasmāt puṣpādyaiḥ nāma na pūjā ||

‘The dissolving away, which is repose in the Great Sky. the light of supreme

consciousness by devout, most excellent faith, is (real) worship. Thus (just the offering
of) flowers and the like is not worship.' Swami Lakshmanjoo explains: “The real

worship is where your intellect is firmly established in the supreme void of

thoughtlessness . . . where one merges with great respect, with great honour. You
dissolve. You lose everything. Not with dishonour, not with hatred, but with honour you
merge in that supreme thought-free state of cidākāśasʼ. (Báumer 2002: 173-174) Note
that worship (pūjā) is said here to be a way of quelling the activity of the mind. Thuṣ
essentially, it is a form of Yoga, which according to the Yogasūtra (1/1) is the ‘stilling
of the activity of the mind’ (citavṛttinirodha). Although the result is the same, the Yoga
taught here differs from that of the YS. According to the latter, the mind is constantly
distracted, shifting from one object to another. This condition, which is painful and


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

(Here ends) the prologue (ādivākya)

Thus (Abhinavagupta expressly) says that (this initial section praising

the Trika Deities and teachers is) the prologue (ādivākya), in order to

make

known that it is just a single (coherent and univocal) statement, which is the
prologue, that has as its purpose (and meaning that of) a Great Statement
(concerning the nondual nature of reality that inspires its recognition)

It is not accepted here (in our view) that anything else apart from the
Supreme Lord’s descent of the power (of grace) serves as an instrumental cause
(nimitta) (to induce one) to apply oneself to hearing etc. that scripture. Even so,
it is the (normal) style of those who write (such) treatises to compose this
‘prologue’ in order to establish (initially) the subject (they will discuss)

(abhidheya), (its) purpose (prayojana) and so on, to serve as a cause (to

induce others) to apply (themselves to the study and practice of the teachings).

binding, is remedied by concentration. As the mind is nothing apart from its activity,

when it is stilled it ceases to exist. The VBh teaches that it is stilled by worship, which
induces it to dissolve away into pure consciousness.

! There is a play on words here which is hard to translate. The traditional belief is that

although the scriptures are very extensive and say many things, there is an underlying
unanimity — ekavākyatā — literally, ‘single statement’. This ‘single’ unanimous

‘statement’ or teaching concerns the reality — ar1ha — which is the meaning — artha of
the Great Statement of all the scriptures, namely, that there is only one reality, which is
Śiva, and that this reality is taught most fully and completely in the Trika scriptures and
by the teachers of the Trika school. The term ‘mahāvākya’ Great Statement — is well
known to the followers of the schools that take as their authority the Vedas, especially

the Upaṇiṣads. According to Śaṅkara, the great exponent of Advaita Vedānta, these

Great Statements found in the Upaṇiṣads sum up and declare their essential teachings,
namely, that the Brahman (the Absolute) is the one reality, and that it is the Self which
is our true, eṣsential nature. The most famous of them is tat tvam asi, ‘you are That’.

See below, note 1,482.

In other words, Jayaratha is saying that the introductory verses, in which

Abhinava worships his deity in its various aspects and then his teachers, serves to
inspire the recognition of their identity with one’s own Self, and that this is the highest
form of worship, in which individuality dissolves away into the infinite expanse of the

pure consciousness of Deity. As such, these verses serve the same enlightening function
of the Great Sayings of the Upaniṣads.
Tt is standard practice for a writer to state explicitly at the beginning of a technical or
philosophical work the basic elements which qualify it as a systematic treatise (śāstra).
These necessary constituent elements of a śāstra are technically called ‘anubandha’.
They are generally said to be four (anubandhacatuṣṭaya): 1) Saṁbandha — this is the

relationship between the author and his teachers, and hence that of the work and those
who contributed to it. This matter is discussed in order to establish the authenticity of
the doctrines expounded in the work. 2) Abhidheya — this is the subject of the treatise.
Under this heading we can add abhidhāna, which is the name of the work, and defines
what it expounds. 3) Prayojana — this is the aim of the treatise and its purpose.
4)

Adhīkārin — this concerns the qualities of one who is fit to study the work and receive
instructions as to its deeper meaning. Jayaratha explains that the ‘initial statement’
(ādivākya) (i.e. verses 1 to 21) serves the function of the anubandha.

TANTRĀLOKA

(1) The subject (abhidheya) of the Tantrāloka is the Trika teaching

(rrikārtha), which is of many kinds, such as being the (the goddesses) Parā,
Parāparā and Aparā. It is implied by the first five verses and is expressly stated
in the expression ‘the procedures (krama) of the Anuttara Trika
(2) The Definition (abhidhāna) of the Tantrāloka. The five verses (i.e.,

16 to 20) beginning with ‘the venerable Bhaṭṭanātha’ have been dedicated to

establishing the excellence of the root tradition (over all others) by defining it

(abhidhāna) as the main one of all the scriptures, and by his own skilfullness

in presenting those who made it.

(3) The Purpose (prayojana) of the Tantrāloka. (The teaching that) has
come (down) through the line of teachers executes (and declares) its own

purpose (prayojana), in accord with stated teachings such as:

‘Therefore, teaching what has come down through the series of

teachers, one attains Supreme Śiva.

(Thus) seven verses (i.e., 7-13) are composed to praise the teachers in

order to present (the teachers of) the lineage as an ancillary (aṅga) of that
(purpose). Thus, the purpose (prayojana) (of these verses is to indicate) that
(Abhinava) himself has been given liberation in this life (jīvanmaukti) by the
recognition of that (reality) as his own nature by the progressive sequence
(krama) of means (to realisation) which will be explained (further ahead).

One could add that the very first verse implicitly contains all of them also. In
that case, the first of these, that is the relationship (sarṁbandha) between the author and

his teachers, begins with Abhinavagupta’s father, identified with the ‘secret’ five-faced

Sadāśiva, mentioned in the first verse. The second matter (anubandha) is the subject
(abhidheya) of the treatise, which defines it most comprehensively. In this case, it is
anuttarāmṛtakula, which not only means ‘the Family of the nectar of the Absolute
(anuttara), as translated, but is also a way of referring to the teachings of the Trika
school Abhinava expounds. This too is the attainment, which is its purpose (prayojana),
the third matter (anubandha). In other words, right from the start Abhinava declares that
the purpose of his work is the exposition of the form of Trika he teaches so as to lead
others to the realisation of Anuttara. This means both the unsurpassable (an-uttara)

school of Trika and the particular ‘family’ (kula) or lineage of Trika which teaches the

attainment of Anuttara, the Absolute. Moreover, what is also denoted (abhidheya) there
is, according to Jayaratha (comm. 1/1), that even though countless energies, beginning

with consciousness, arise out of Śiva consciousness, His freedom, denoted in the first
verse as ‘the pure digit of the Moon’, is the main one. Again, the penetration of Śiva and
Śakti is also denoted (abhidhāna) there, as is the physical union of Abhinava’s parents.

Finally, the fourth matter concerns the qualities of the person who writes the treatise that
make him fit to do so (adhikārin). In this case Abhinavagupta implies that he is so
because he was born of a yoginī and a siddha.

See above, note 1,220, for the meaning of ‘artha’ as ‘school’.
Above, 1/14.
Read -kauśalyena for —kauśalena.
“ Inṣṭead of diśan — ‘teaching, MS K reads mṛśan — ‘contemplatingʼ.
See below, 1/274ab (273cd) ff. and chapter 36.


In the Mālinīvijayavārtika (1/194cd-196ab) Abhinava declares:



CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘Only in some cases (kvāpi) does the highest perfection (come about) quickly,
without effort and through liberation in life, as taught (iti) in our systems. Sometimes
the highest fruit is reached after a long time through a gradual course of unification with
a series of reality levels (ta1tva) and through many various rituals.
There are thus said to be two possible kinds of liberation: gradual and
immediate. The former is fully attained only after death. It is ‘liberation without a body”
(videhamukti). The other takes place while a person is still alive (jīvanmukti). Siddhānta

Śaivism generally accepts only the former. Trika accepts both, but considers the latter to
be superior. It is the realisation of oneness with Bhairava which takes place by the most
intense form of the descent of the power of grace (śaktipāta) (see below, 13/129cd ff.
for a discussion of the varieties of the descent of the power of grace). Abhinava writes:
prayojaṇaiṁ

ca

sarvyapramāt.rṇāṁ

vaśotpannaitāvadanuttara-jñānabhājanabhāvānām

vibhoḥ

paraśaktipātānugraha-

itthaṁ

nija-

svarūpahr̥dayaṇgamībhāvena
nijāmodabharakrīḍābhāsita-bhedasya
nikhilabandhābhimatatattvavrātasya svātmacamatkārapūrṇāhantātādātmyabhairavasvarūpābhedsamāveśātmikā jīvata eva muktiḥ | prāṇadehādibhīmāv eva hi
antarbahiṣkaraṇa-viṣayāyāṁ preraṇākhyāyām udyogabala-j vanādirūpāyāṁ rūḍhasya
bandhābhimatebhyo muktiḥ .iti
te | truṭite'pi hi māyīye saṁskāramātre keyaṁ
muktivācoyuktiḥ kim apekṣayā vā? iti tad uktaṁ śrīṣpande -

iti vā yasya saṅvittiḥ krīdātvenākhilaṁ jagat |

sa paśyan satataṁ yukto jīvanmukto na saṁśayaḥ ||

‘The aim (prayojana) of all sentient beings who are the vessels of the

aforementioned knowledge of the Absolute (Anuttara), that has developed within them
by the grace of the descent of the Lord’s supreme power, is solely liberation in this life
(jīvanmukti). īt is penetrating absorption (samāveśa) in the unity which is the inherent
nature of Bhairava. (This unity is) the oneness of the integral egoity and wonder of
one’s own nature with all those principles, generally considered to be binding, (that
consist of) the duality made manifest by the play occasioned by the fullness of one’s
own inherent bliss. It is experienced by profoundly understanding and laying hold of

one’s own nature. It is said that liberation from that which is considered binding belongs

only to one who resides on the plane of the vital breath and the body etc., which is the

object of the internal and external senses, that is to say, to one who is established in the

exertion (of consciousness) (udyoga), the power (of one’s own nature) (bala), the life
principle etc., which is called the impulse (preraṇa) (that gives life to all living beings).

Once every trace of Māyā has been removed, then what sense does the word ‘liberation’

have and in relation to what?” As has been declared in the Spandakārikā (30):
‘Or, constantly attentive, and perceiving the entire universe as play, he who has
this awareness (samvitti) is undoubtedly liberated in this life.’ PTv p. 18, cf. ibid. p. 96.
In other words, if manifest reality (‘the entire universe) is perceived

dualistically, that is, if it is not recognized to be the natural dynamism of the one light of

consciousness, it is binding. But, if, on the contrary it is recognized to be such, then as

Sanderson (2006: 48-49) puts it: ‘the cognition and action which previously obscured

the real identity of the individual now illustrate its all-pervading and unobscurable
power. Liberation in life (jvvanmuktiḥ) is just this perception of the dynamic unity of

consciousness in each of its self-obscurations.” The reason for this is because Śaiva
nondualism is not based on the rejection of duality as is the case, for example, in

Advaita Vedānta. Reality is one and nondual because it embraces both duality and
nonduality. As Abhinava says:

TANTRĀLOKA

This is indicated also by the last verse (of these seven verses,
i.e. the

thirteenth,) and is stated directed in the (very last) verse (i.e. the twenty-first,)
that begins with ‘the venerable Śambhunātha’.
What mindful person who has been sanctified by the Supreme Lord’s
descent of the power (of grace) would not engage (in practice) for the sake of
that? This is the reason (nimitta) for his engagement (pravṛtti) (in the practice of

the teachings). But obstacles (are possible and do) arise also for one who is

applying (himself) to realise that in accord with such teachings as: ‘ṭhe
Vināyakas conjoin him to transitory worldly pleasuresʼ. Thus, in order to
remove these (obstacles) (he has composed the sixth verse,) praising Gaṇeśa

(the head of the Vināyakas) and Vaṭuka.

(4) The relationship (sarṁbandha) between these concerns. He says that

‘requested (by (my) sincere disciples and fellows,) I compose (this work)ʼ,

that is, the work (prakriyā) he has promised (pratijñātā) (to write), the
name
(abhidhāna) of which is Tantrāloka, in accord with what is stated further
ahead

(where we read):
‘Here in this teaching called the Light of (and on) the Tantras
(Tantrāloka), 1 expound this (four-fold knowledge, which is the great dawning

of accomplishment (siddhi) and liberation).

Moreover, in this way this sense is also (implicitly) included, namely,

the relationship (saṁbandha) between the name (of the work) (abhidhāna)

and

its subject (abhidheya), and that of the subject and its purpose (prayojana),
which is that between the object of denotation and the denotator and that
between the goal (sādhya) and the means to achieve it (sādhana), (respectively).
Thus, there is only one prologue, which consists of the combination of many

statements, that has been uttered in order to (impel one to) act (pravṛtti)

(accordingly). This in brief is the overall meaning.

‘We do not base our contention that (reality) is one because of the
contradiction inherent in saying that it is dual. Iṭ is your approach (pakṣa) that accepts
this (method). (While) if (duality and oneness) were in fact (to contradict each other,)

they would clearly be two (distinct realities). ‘This is duality and that is not’, ‘that is this

(reality) which is (both) dual and nondual’ — where (these perceptions) manifest
equally,
that is said to be nondual. Surely, (even if you were to object) that in this way there
would be duality (bheda), let it be! We do not desire (to make use of many) words. We
do not (admit that there is duality between the oneness) that needs be accepted and (the

duality) that should be rejected, as there is here (in this case) according to you. If you

wish to take the support of the view (pakṣa) that graces all, then accept (this) philosophy
(dṛṣṭi) of supreme nonduality, which is the great refuge (of all).” MVV 1/628-631,

cf. MP (2) 9/68 and Dyczkowski 1987: 36-38.

! Read slokāmāsātritam for Ślokāntarāṣūtritam.

The name ‘gaṇeśa’ literally means ‘Lord of Hosts'. The ‘hosts’ in this case are the

Vināyakas, of whom Gaṇeśa is the greatest one. The Vināyakas belong to the extensive

class of supernatural beings, like ghosts, that are troublesome or even malicious. When

their Lord is propitiated, instead of causing trouble, they help and protect from the same
troubles they cause, which in this case is attachment to worldly pleasures.
Below, 1/246cd-247ab (245).


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

INTRODUCTION

There is no dispute here that the votaries of all views (agree that)
liberation (mokṣa) is (the goal) to be attained and that transmigratory existence,
which is its opposite, should be abandoned. (Moreover, everybody agrees) that
the reason (for it) (nimitta) īs false knowledge (mithyājñāna), and that
knowledge of reality counters it. Thus, just by experiencing it directly,
ignorance is removed, and so one attains liberation. Even so, those (who follow
other paths) have not known the one, fixed (niyata) nature of knowledge and
ignorance, (and so maintain differing conflicting views). (Thus, as is said,) ‘by
(their) desire for liberation, Māyā makes (them) wander about (confused) in
what is not liberation.’ According to this and other such teachings, what is
considered to be liberation (by such people) is not (real) liberation. In order to

show this and assert that, although the examination of that is fundamental (for
all schools), (the approach here) will be explained in a manner that differs from
other śāstras. Thus, the author (first) writes about the examination (of the nature

of) bondage and liberation in the very introduction itself (of his work).

Concerning Freedom and Bondage, Knowledge and Ignorance

Tāī̄Ḥ ūJTGTĪ HTARĀRTŪTT |I 23I
iha tāvat samasteṣu śāstreṣu parigīyate |
ajñānaṁ saṁsṛter hetur jñānaṁ mokṣaikakāraṇam || 22 ||

Well then, it is proclaimed here (unanimously) in all the scriptures

that ignorance is the cause of transmigration, and knowledge is the sole

cause of liberation (from it).

(Next) he says that we have not just stated our own idea:

TGōTTĪTTSTĪx TḍTTIGGGTTVT |

=f I

malam ajñānam icchanti saṁsārāṅkurakāraṇam |

" According to Jayaratha, this general introduction continues up to verse 105 (106).

However, in his Tantrasāra, Abhinavagupta brings the introduction to a close at the

equivalent of verse 51, where he ends his exposition of the nature of knowledge and
ignorance.

SVT 10/1141ab, where this is said with reference to Vaiṣṇavas. See below, comm.

4/17-18ab and note. Kṣemarāja explains that ‘what is not liberation is everything other
than the pervasion of the oneness of the Supreme Lord, who is the dense (uninterrupted)
consciousness
and
bliss
of
supreme
nonduality.”

paramādvaitacidānandaghana-parameśvaraikyavyāpter anyat sarvam eva. The same

line is quoted by Abhinava himself in 4/38, 8/337ab (8/336cd), 13/316cd-31 7ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

“The same is said in the venerable Mālinīvijayottara (thus): “(The

wise) prefer (the view that) Impurity (mala) is ignorance (not a material
Abhinava is presenting here the basic argument against dualist Siddhānta Śaiviṣm,

which maintains that the soul is bound by Impurity, which is a material substance in
some sense, not simply immaterial ignorance. Sanderson (1992: 285-6, quoted in

Goodall et al. 2015: 40-41) explains clearly and succinctly the essentials of the concept

of bondage according to fully developed Siddhānta doctrine, against which Abhinava is

arguing:

‘Liberation cannot be achieved through mere knowledge of reality without

recourse to ritual. This is because the state of bondage, in which the soul fails to realize
its innate omniscience and omnipotence, is not caused by mere ignorance. The
ignorance that characterizes the unliberated is the effect of an imperceptible Impurity
(malam) that acts on the soul from outside; and this Inpurity, though it is imperceptible,

is a material substance (drayam). Because it is a substance, only action (vyāpāraḥ) can
remove it; and the only action capable of removing it is that of the rituals of initiation

and their sequel taught by Śiva in his Tantric scriptures.

Under the influence of Impurity, the soul continues to be subject to the
products of māyā. It is bound by incarnation in a particular world, with a particular
body, and mental and physical faculties. It has limited power of knowledge (vidyā) and
action (kalā). It is bound to experience the effects of its past action (niyatiḥ). It is subject

to time (kālaḥ); and it is driven by a nonspecific craving for worldly experience (rāgaḥ).

While it is caught by these products of māyā it acts and experiences the fruits of its
actions in birth after birth. The unliberated soul (paśuḥ, aṇuḥ) is therefore said to be
constrained by four fetters (pāśaḥ): 1) Impurity (malam), 2) māyā, 3) its past actions
(karma), and 4) the power of Śiva’s will that holds it subject to these three (rodhaśakti).
In later texts the term Impurity is extended from the first fetter to the second and third.
The first is then termed Impurity associated with (all) the Unliberated (āṇṉavam
[< aṇuḥ] malam), whereas the second and the third become the Impurities of Māyā
(māyīyaṁ malam) and Karma (kārmaṁ malam).
Goodall (2015: 41) points out that Sadyojyotiḥ (c. 675-750 AD) expounded the

doctrine of mala in the Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha. However, it is not found in earlier
Saiddhāntika literature. That means not just the earliest sutras of the Niśvāsa but also in

the non-eclectic recensions of the Kālottara, the surviving Rauravsūtrasaṁgraha,
Niśvāsakārikā and Sarvajñānottara. Ṭhuṣ, although the doctrine come to be a hallmark

of firṣṭ Saiddhāntika Śaiviṣm and then Śaiva doctrine in general, surprisingly it is not

found in earliest period and is not uniformly taught. Also note that there are instances in

the Siddhāntas where mala is also understood as ignorance. In the Parākhya (4/25) the
consciousness of individual souls is ‘enveloped by ignorance’ (ajñūānāvṛtacetasām), thus

implicitly identifying fundamental Impurity mala with ignorance. See also ibid. 4/162cd

and Kiraṇa 2/19cd-20.

‘Impurity (paśutva) is not the state of being of a bound soul (paśor bhāvaḥ) (it
is mala); the nature (of the soul) is (rather) its own power of knowledge (svarūpaṁ

svacidātmakam). Therefore impurity (paśutvam) is nescience (ajīānam), or the state of

being characterized by ignorance (bhāvo vājñānalakṣaṇaḥ). Since it obstructs the
sentient (soul), it is called in scripture ‘nescience’ (ajñānam). The consciousness of the

soul is that which is to be revealed; her effects are what reveal it.. Parākhya 4/162-163

(translation by Goodall)


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


substance as the dualists maintain).√ It is the cause of (Karma, which is)
the sprout of transmigratory existence (saṁsāra).’
malo ʻjñānaṁ paśutvaṁ ca tiraskārakaras tamaḥ ||
avidyā hy āvṛtir mūrcchā paryāyās tasya coditāḥ |

sa cavidyādiparyāyabhedaiḥ siddho mate mate | Kiraṇa 2/19cd-20
‘Impurity is ignorance and the fettered state. It is variously called ‘obscuring
darknessʼ, ‘ignorance’, ‘covering’, and ‘coma’. (Its existence) is established in each
school (mata) as ignorance and various such synonymous terms.”

Cf. below ad 9/206, quote from Sivatanu, where the same expression occurs. There

the cause of transmigratory existence is also said to be āṇavamala, but it is identified
with the impurity that sullies individual consciousness, not ignorance.
MV 1/23¢cd quoted again below in 9/120cd, in TĀv ad 9/65cd-66a (1/23a), ad
9/98cd-99ab, and paraphrased in 13/49cd. The MV may be elaborating on Svāṁbhu.
1/17e: malaṁ saṁsārakāraṇam. In the MV, this line comes just after a description of

the thVijñāna- and Pralayakevala perceivers. See below, note 1,658 to 1/78-80.

The discussion concerning knowledge, ignorance and Impurity continues up to
verse 51. See also TSā p. 2-5 and below 9/62-87, and 13/1-128. Abhinava discusses the

nature of the Impurity - mala — that obscures and binds the soul below in 9/60-88ab and
13/41cd-52, where he establishes with reasoned argument that it can only be ignorance

and not a substance, as the dualist Siddhānta believes. Thus, at the very outset of his
Tantrāloka he presents the nondualist Śaiva view that liberation is achieved by attaining
the knowledge of reality that comes by Śiva's grace, not by ritual action alone as the

Siddhānta maintains. As Sanderson points out (2006: 39-40);: ‘[Siddhānta] rejected
the
notion that liberation could be brought about by enlightenment, by mere knowledge.
Knowledge could liberate only if a man's state of bondage in saṅsāra were simply an
error or illusion. It argued that while unliberated existence is indeed characterized
by
erroneous views, the ultimate cause of this ignorance is Impurity (malam). Now this

Impurity was not some transcendental Illusion in the style of the nondualistic Vedānta . .

. but rather a pervasive, unperceived material substance (dravyam). So long as an
individual is not ripe for liberation Śiva will cause this Impurity to contaminate him,

preventing him from realizing that in his real nature he is an omniscient and omnipotent

being equal to Śiva himself. But when Śiva sees that a soul is ready for release he

will

Power (śaktipāta). This will reveal the individual to an officiant as fit to receive

the

restrain the power of this Impurity and show his favour in the form of a Descent of
initiation through which Śiva will grant him release. Knowledge alone could not liberate

him, whether it arose by the power of the individual himself or by the favour of Śiva,
precisely because this Impurity is a material substance (dravyam). Śiva-iṉspired

knowledge might reveal the existence of Impurity, as a man may realize that his sight is

impaired by a cataract, but just as the cataract can only be removed by surgical
intervention, so Impurity will remain until it is physically destroyed by the appropriate

action (yyāpāraḥ). This action is the result of Tantric Śaiva initiation revealed by Śiva in

his scriptures.’ See also ibid. p.43-44 and Dyczkowski 1992a: 235-6.

This verse is

Maheśvarānanda writes:


quoted

in

the

Mahārthamañjari

(p.

30-31),

where

‘The condition (daśā) of the reflective awareness of (the Lord of
consciousness) is the state which is the dynamic manifestation of the pulse (of the light
of consciousness) (sphuraṇa). By the application of its primary state of orientation
(aunmukhyayogena), which is the Light (of consciousness) as (the universal) agency (of

consciousness), it bums up the series of Impurities pertaining to the individual soul

(āṇava), Karma and Māyā. (In other words,) as that which has been made to enter into

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Ignorance’ is darkness. (t is not a total absence of knowledge; rather)

itis incomplete knowledge, which consists of (mistakenly) considering what is

not the Self (i.e. the body etc.) and what is the Self to be otherwise (than what
they really are). It is the concealment of one’s own nature along with the

reality (it consists of) that has arisen by the Supreme Lord’s free will alone.

That is the individual soul’s (essential) (āṇava) ‘Impurity’ (mala), not the
substance (dualist Śaivites believe it to be, the existence of which) will be

refuted in the Ninth Chapter and others (further ahead). And it is said (in the

Iśvarapratyabhijñā):

its own nature, it appropriates it (and makes it one with itself). . . . The nature of the
Supreme Lord is the Light of consciousness and (its) reflective awareness as knowledge
and action (respectively). Moreover, even though on the one hand his noetic and
reflective subjectivity persists, (at the same time on the other) he gives rise to the
Impurity pertaining to the individual soul). . . . Everything is the outpouring of Impurity
(malollāsa). Its nature is just the lack of propensity to (the exercise of) one’s own
reflective awareness (of one’s own nature), in accord with the doctrine of the
Maālinīvijayottara (which declares that:) ‘(The wise) prefer (the view that) Impurity
(mala) is ignorance (not a material substance as the dualists maintain). It is the cause of
(Karma, which is) the sprout of transmigratory existence (saṁsāra).”

In other words, ignorance is the mistaken notion that the components of the

psychophysical organism, which are not the Self, are the Self, and that Śiva

consciousness, which is the Self, is not the Self.
Read -samullāṣitaṁ for -samullāsita-

Concerning mala, see below, 9/49 ff. and 13/41cd ff. For clear, general explanations

of the three forms of mala, see PrH comm. sū 9, ŚSūvi on sātrra 1/1-3. Dualist
Śaivasiddhānta maintains that there are thre eternal realities. These are Pati - the Lord,
Paśu — the fettered souls, and Pāśa — the fetter that binds them. The individual bound
souls are essentially the same nature as Śiva, that is, pure consciousness. However,

whereas Siva, the Lord, is infinitely great, the souls are infinitely small and so are also
called ‘aṇus’ — literally ‘atoms’. Again, whereas Śiva has never been bound, nor will He
ever be, the fettered souls are confined by the fetters of what the Siddhānta consider to
be a material-like substance that sullies the soul, and so is appropriately called mala

‘dirt’ or ‘Impurity’. Although essentially one, it has three aspects or, one could say,

functions or energies. The basic form is the fundamental Impurity that obscures the
essential, pure conscious nature of the soul and separates it from the Lord. It is
accordingly called Āṇavamala — the Impurity of the individual soul (aṇu). Although
substantial in some sense, it consists of the fettered soul’s generic craving (abhilāṣa) for
existence and the fulfilment of the fundamental feeling it has that it is incomplete
(apūrṇamanyatā). The liberating union with Pati — the Lord — can only take place when

the soul is purified so that the barrier that separates them is removed. The world in

which the fettered soul resides is made from the same impurity, operating now as the
‘substance, as it were, of the worlds and metaphysical principles, body, senses, and

mind, the soul inhabits and forces that constrain it. AIl these constitute the domain of

Maāyā in which the fettered soul is stricken by the delusion of duality. This means that
he perceives every single thing as distinct and different from everything else to such a
degree that no two things are the same. Coupled with that sense of difference and a
consequence of it is the sense that some things belong to him whereas others do not. His
body, family, possessions, and the world he inhabits are his own, others are not. Finally,
he distinguishes between what he wishes to have (upadeya) and what he feels he needs
to avoid and give up (heya). Such are the consequences of Māyīyamala, the Impurity of

Maāyā. The third binding Impurity is Karma. It is both the result and instrumental cause


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘This, the Impurity which pertains directly to the individual soul

(āṇayaṁ malam), brought about by the obliteration (of the knowledge) of one’s

own true nature, is of two kinds. It is the loss of the freedom of (its innate)

consciousness, and so too (along with it) the lack of consciousness of (its

innate) freedom.”

of the other two impurities, which it sustains and by which it is sustained. Just as the
Impurity of the individual soul is the fundamental cause, Māyā the material cause and
Karma is the immediate, instrumental cause of worldly experience (bhoga), which is
essentially its consequence. Just as actions (karman) constantly vary, so do the

experiences the fettered soul has. The Siddhānta understands these three collectively to
be like the husks and integument of a grain of rice, or a cataract that can only be
removed by material means, namely, the rite of initiation, which detaches the

fundamental impurity from the soul and conjoins it to Śiva.
Nondualist Śaivas agree that mala exists and that it does function in these

ways. Indeed, they draw freely from Siddhānta sources to describe it. However, they
maintain thatṭ it is not an independent reality nor are the individual souls. Rather, mala is
essentially nothing but ignorance, and that it can be removed only by knowledge.
Initiatoon does remove mala and conjoin the soul to Śiva, but this is because initiation is

a process whereby the innate knowledge of the pure consciousness is revealed by the
removal of ignorance. It is not a mechanical process like cleaning rice or removing a
cataract from the eye. See below, 1/241ab-242ab (1/240-241) and 9/68 ff. for a detailed

criticism of the view that mala is an independent reality. See also 13/41cd f.

IP 3/24. AIṣo quoted below, TĀv ad 5/106 (5/105cd-106ab) and ad 962. 32/4d is

quoted in ad 9/93cd-95ab. Below 9/65ab: apūrṇamanyatā ceyaṁ; see there and
commentary. Also PrHṛ p. 21: apūrṇamanyatārūāpam āṇavaṁ malam.
This definition of āṇavamala is the result of Utpaladeva’s higher nondualist

exegesis of the Siddhānta doctrine of mmala. He explains in his own brief commentary

(vṛtti) how it is a derivative of consciousness, which is always essentially one with it,
not an independent insentient reality: ‘The (one) absolute reality is free consciousness;

only insofar as this, its essence, is in a state of perfect fullness. Since it thus wills, by
virtue of its very freedom (the Āṇava impurity exists which is two-fold. It is) ‘Impurity

because it involves error with regards to the Self’s real nature, and ‘two-fold atomicity

insofar as consciousness becomes limited by the loss of its fullness (that is, all-

embracing oneness) thereby creating (a form of) subjectivity in which only the light of

consciousness subsists which is devoid of freedom or only freedom devoid of

consciousness.' Translation by Torella with minor variants. Abhinava explains:

‘According to this system, the essential characteristics of the principle of consciousness
(cittattva) are omniscience and omnipotence. The impurity called ‘Āṇava’ consists in
the loss of these, so that the Self becomes limited. Here (in this case its) limited state is
the obscuration of (its) real nature. Thus, even when there is omniscience, but it is

simply the obscuration of omnipotence, which consists of perfect freedom and forms

another characteristic feature (of the real Self) or vice versa, there is the same Impurity
called Āṇavamala, which consists of the obscuration of the real essential nature.”

Translation by K.C. Pandey.


The verse that follows defines the other two forms of impurity (mala):

‘The perception of objects as divided off (from one another, and the perceiver)
is the (impurity) called ‘Māyā’. It (subjects the soul to repeated) birth, and
to
experiencing the consequences (of its actions) (bhoga). (The Impurity) of Karma
(operates) in the agent who is not conscious (of his true nature). (All) three are due to

the power of Māyā.”

TANTRĀLOKA

And how is it? He says (that that ignorance is the cause of)
‘transmigratory existence’, which is the Impurity of Māyā (māyīyamala),
whose nature has been defined (in the śvarapratyabhijñā thus): ‘The perception
of objects as divided off (from one another and the perceiver) is the (Impurity)

here called ‘Māyā’.’ According to the teaching, which will be imparted
further ahead (where we read): ‘Karma, the cause of transmigratory existence, is

said to be the sprout of transmigratory existence, ‘the sprout’, which is the

cause of the impurity of Karma (karmamala), is ‘the cause’ of that
(transmigratory existence). The same is said in the Mālinīvijayottara: (the
soulʼs essential) Impurity and Karma are the instrumental cause (nimitta), the
effect (of which) follows after.' (What Abhinavagupta is) stressing in this way
is that it is with reference to that (namely, bondage and its remedy,) that this
book is concerned.

Sanderson 1992: 289: n 35: bhinnavedyarathātraiva māyākhyam Ś(the
Impurity) termed Māyā is the manifestation of the object as other which presupposes
that (two-fold contraction of the self’s nature which is āṇavaṁ malam).” Ibid note 36:
janmabhogadaṁ kartary abodhe kārmaṁ tu As for the karmaṁ malam, it is that in the
unenlightened agent which gives rise to rebirth and the experience of reward and

retribution.
In this way, the same impurity develops in these three forms. Abhinava

explains: ‘(Transmigratory existence (sarṁsāra) is due to the progressive emergence of
the three-fold impurity. The first is the (mistaken) notion within our own Self of (its
being) incomplete (apūrṇa), that brings about the condition of the individual soul (aṇu),
and so is the soul’s (essential) impurity (āṇavamala). (Then) in the craving to make full
(and complete) that which is not, the impurity called Māyā (arises) due to the perception
of duality (bhedadarśana). (Then the fettered state is fully formed) by the emergence of
the impurity of Karma, that takes place by the assumption of latent impressions, good

and bad. PTv p. 41.

}P 3/2/5ab. ĪP 3/2/5a is quoted below in TĀv ad 17/63.
Below 9/88cd.
Although Jayaratha clearly tells us that this line is from the MV. it is not found in the

printed edition. In actual fact it is a citation of SvT 3/176ab (also quoted below in TĀv
ad 5/106 (105cd-106ab), where it is labelled as SvT 3/176), ad 9/88cd-89ab and ad
13/49). Note however, that when Kṣemarāja quotes this line in one place in his
commentary he writes that it is found ‘in another Tantra’ (tantrāntare) (SvTu
10/378cd). We may perhaps understand him to mean that the same line is also found in

‘another Tantra’. If so, he may be referring to the MV.
Kṣemarāja explains, commenting on SYT 3/176ab: ‘these two, namely, (the

fundamental) impurity (of the soul) and Karma, are (both) an instrumental cause,

because (the fundamental) impurity is the cause of Karma and Karma is the cause of
(the impurity) of Māyā. Beyond that, (the impurity of) Māyā is (their) result. The
meaning is that (Māyā) is the effect of (fundamental) impurity and Karma. Although
(the impurity of) Karma exists when the (impurity of) Māyā, which is the perception of

objectivity divided up (in itself and from the perceiver) exists, even so, it is not a cause

(of bondage) for those who know (reality) and (whose consciousness) is fully expanded,

even though (objectivity) exists, (duality) is not perceived. Thus, it is the acquisition of
those who (because of their fundamental impurity) consider (themselves) to be

incomplete. Thus, what has been said is the most (correct).”


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


(Now he goes on to) say that although there are two kinds of ignorance

— Spiritual (pauruṣa) and Intellectual (bauddha) — the one meant here is

Spiritual (Ignorance), not the other.

viśeṣaṇena buddhisthe saṁsārottarakālike |
saṃbhāvanāṁ nirasyaitad abhāve mokṣam abravīt || 24 ||

Once having precluded the possibility (that knowledge) present in

the intellect, which is subsequent to (the fettered state of) transmigration,

(is liberating,) by specifying (that ignorance is ‘the cause of the sprout of

transmigration’ʼ,) (the Lord) said that liberation (is achieved even) when
that (intellectual knowledge) is absent.

‘By specifying’” (that ignorance) is ‘the cause of the sprout of

transmigration’ (implies that) intellectual ignorance, which is erroneous
apprehension (durvyavasāya), is not the cause of the impurity of Karma

(karmamala). Rather, (on the contrary,) that (Karma is the cause) of that

(ignorance). So how can this specification (of the nature of ignorance as ‘the

cause of the sprout of transmigration’) be made coherent (with this view)? That

(i.e. intellectual ignorance) is possible (only when) there is a body which is the

cause of (all) action (karman), because it is the instrument (to accomplish) its
objective (kārya). Moreover, the intellect is one of the senses, and so it is said

that ‘i is subsequent to (the fettered state of) transmigration’. It is said (in

the Svacchantatantra) that: ‘(whatever) has form, a body and a world (in which

it exists), is said to belong to Māyā (nāyīya)’. Thus according to such

teachings, (the intellect) is subsequent to transmigratory existence and the body.
This is the meaning.
(One may ask whether) it is said that ‘(the Lord) has said that
liberation (is achieved even) when that (intellectual knowledge) is absent’ in
order to preclude the possibility (that the intellect is the site of this liberating
knowledge)? (Our reply is that) liberation (is not achieved) when just

intellectual ignorance ceases, for™ when that ceases, only intellectual

knowledge arises. Even if the nature (of this intellectual knowledge) were to be

a pure thought (śuddhavikalpa) (free of all intellectual ignorance), according to
MS J contains an interesting gloss here which reads: ‘as this (ignorance) is predicated

of what pertains to the soul (pauruṣa), when there is no spiritual (pauruṣa) ignorance
there is liberation; this is certainly not so when intellectual ignorance is absent.’
pauruṣaviśeṣaṇena pauruṣasya ajñānābhāve mokṣaḥ na tu bauddhājñānābhāve.

Read with MSs Ch, J, Jh, T and D viśeṣaṇeneti for viśeṣaṇena.

SVT 4/105ab. Instead of śarīrabhuvanākāro māyīyaḥ parikīritaḥ, the printed edition

of the SvT reads: Śarīrabhuvanākārā māyīyāḥ parikīrtitāḥ | “(Those things that) have a
form, body and a world (in which they exist) are said to belong to Māyā (māyīya).”
Kṣemarāja comments: ‘the worlds’ indicates phenomena (bhāva) and the gross elements
etc. Thus, whatever manifests as objectivity is the impurity of Māyā (nāyīyamala).

Read yatas tasmin for yat tasmin.

TANTRĀLOKA

the teaching that: ‘all thought is transmigratory existence it would

(nonetheless) give rise to transmigratory existence. So how can (liberation) be

possible in this way (simply) when that (intellectual ignorance) is absent? Even
outsiders (who do not belong to our school) say with (the same) intention:

‘A wise man should not immerse (himself in any notions) —~ even

thought that concerns ultimate reality. What difference is there between an

auspicious and an inauspicious thought? (They are both equally just notions).

Now, if once Spiritual Ignorance had ceased by means of initiation and
the like, intellectual knowledge were to arise, (only) then, in accord with the

teaching imparted (further ahead), would it also serve as a cause of liberation

in this life (jīvanmukti).
The point is that nothing would be achieved just by that (Intellectual
Knowledge) alone, whereas on the contrary, when Spiritual Knowledge has

ariṣen, it is a cause of liberation that does not depend on (anything) else. As is
said:

‘In the course of initiation (only) the fetters of the soul should be
purified, not those present in the intellect. Thus, even when it is defective, the

initiation is not fruitless.

And the essential nature of that (Spiritual Knowledge) is (just pure)

knowledge alone (jñānamātra) (devoid of thought constructs). The absence of

ignorance (akhyāti) is itself full (and perfect) knowledge (khyāti) (of reality),

and that is the true nature of the Self, which is dense (uninterrupted) Light and

Bliss. The (unfolding) experience (prathana) of that is itself liberation. So it is

rightly said that: ‘(the Lord) said that liberation is (achieved even) when

that (intellectual knowledge) is absentʼ.

““ Quoted again below in TĀv ad 1/214, 4/111cd-113ab, 14/13, and 16/283cd-284ab
(284).

l The same verse is also quoted below in TĀv ad 4/6. See note there.

° How thought is purified and transcended is explained in the first verses of chapter

four, which deals with the Empowered Means that is based on this process. If his
Spiritual Ignorance has been removed by initiation, and the devout Śaivite dedicates
himself all his life to attentively observing the precepts and his ritual obligations, he

attains liberation when he dies (videhamukti).. But if he remedies his Intellectual
Ignorance also, he attains liberation while alive (jvamukti) also. See above, note 1,356.

This verse, and a few more from the same source, are quoted by Kṣemarāja in his
commentary on SvT 4/150-152. See below, note 20,1 ad 20/1, where they are cited.
Not all impurity should be removed in the course of initiation. The part of it
which manifests and sustains the initiate’s current mental and physical existence should
be left intact. Otherwise he would die. This residue is more commonly identified with
the form of Karma which has been set into operation (prārabdha) and suṣtains the body
until it is exhausted. See below, 1/43 and commentary.

“ MSs K, Ch, J, Jh, Ṅ T and Ḍ read just yuktam —- t is righ’ — not yuktam uktam —. ‘it
is rightly said’.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Surely, (one may ask,) what is the basis (and necessity of asserting) that
the meaning of the term ‘ignorance’ is incomplete knowledge (apūrṇajñāna)?
Let that just be simply an absence of knowledge. With this doubt in mind, he

says:

JTTTHĪfT

a f: @raīṝzāsarā
7 ēaatā aṝī || zuII
ajñānam iti na jñānābhāvaś cātiprasaṅgataḥ |
sa hi loṣṭhādike ʻpy asti na ca tasyāsti saṁsṛtiḥ !| 25 ||
(According to us,) ignorance is not a (total) lack of knowledge, for
(if that were so, the use of the term) would be too extensive. That
(ignorance) is also (present) in a stone and the like, and that is not subject

to transmigration.

(If one were to ask) what is that over-extensive (use of the term

‘ignorance’)? (We reply,) its application (to stones and the like). So it is rightly
said that the meaning of the term ‘ignorance’ (in this case) is incomplete

(apūrṇa) knowledge. He says that:

ato jñeyasya tattvasya sāmastyenāprathātmakam |
jñānam eva tad ajñānaṁ śivasūtreṣu bhāsitam || 26 ||
“Therefore, it is said in the Śivasūtras ṭhat (binding) ignorance is

(partial) knowledge (jñāna), which is the lack of perception (prathā) of the
° Virtually all schools of thought in India agree that knowledge of reality is liberation.

Accordingly, the nature of ignorance is a common basic problem discussed by
practically all schools of Indian philosophy. There are a variety of views. One for
example is that ignorance is a total absence of knowledge. Another is that its nature is
inexplicable. The view here is that as knowledge is essentially consciousness and a total
absence of consciousness is impossible, ignorance is also a form of knowledge, albeit
incomplete. The tables and chairs we perceive do exist. So what we see is not incorrect

or false. However, we see only the tables and chairs that are the objects of the senses.
We do not also perceive the one universal reality common to all things which tables and
chairs most essentially are. The ignorance of this aspect amounts to the perception of
duality — the difference between a table and chair — and the specific form of each entity
as distinct and different from every other. In other words, ignorance is understood here
to be partial, dualistic knowledge, which can only illumine certain specific and diṣṭinct
aspects of reality such as when we experience ‘this is a table’ or ‘this is a chair, but do

not experience the one, ultimate, universal nature of all things. We do not perceive the
totality of reality and view the individual entities we perceive as a part and epitome of
the plenitude (pūrṇatā) of that all-embracing oneness.

1/26-30 refer to ŚSū 1/1 and 122, of which these four verses are a commentary.

TANTRĀLOKA

true nature of the object of knowledge (jñeya) in its totality (sāmastyena).N
‘The true nature of the object of knowledgeʼ, that is, of (an external
physical object such as) ‘blue’ (or inner mental object) such as ‘pleasureʼ will
be explained (below, where it is said that): ‘the supreme reality (paraṁ tattvam)
of the object (of perception) is Śiva, Who is Light.’“ ‘Therefore’, for the

aforestated reason, ‘the lack of perception of the true nature (of the object of

knowledge) in its totality (sāmastyena) as a single, compact form, because
(reality is) everywhere (the same) without distinction; (being rather of the sort,)

‘this is blue’ and ‘this is pleasure’, which is a perception of duality and so is
incomplete ‘knowledge’ — that itself is ‘ignorance’. It is not simply an absence
of knowledge, and so (it) is ‘said in the Śivasūtras (that ignorance is (partial)
knowledge). This is the meaning.
Where is that explained there (in the Śivasūtras)? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

ĒT T āFST SATI JĪ |

caitaṅyam ātmā jñānaṁ ca bandha ity atra sūtrayoḥ |
saṁśleṣetarayogābhyām ayam arthaḥ pradarśitaḥ || 27 |

This is the point made by reading the aphorisms ‘the Self is

consciousness” and ‘knowledge is bondage’ alternatively, together and

separately.

‘(By reading the aphorisms) alternatively, together and separatelyʼ,
we get ‘knowledge (jñāna) is bondage’ and 'ignorance (ajñāna) is bondageʼ,
according to whether the (privative) letter ‘a’ is conjoined to or separated from

° Swami Lakṣhmanjoo explains: ‘The Śivasūtra says that ignorance is knowledge [i.e.

cognitive consciousness] in a differentiated form. What is to be known (jñeya) is Lord
Śiva [He is the object of knowledge as is, for example, the colour] blue. When you donʼt
feel Lord Śiva’s function in the objective world that is ignorance.”

“ 1/52ab below, also quoted in TĀv ad 1/54 and 10/55cd-56ab.
’Abhinavagupta is referring here to the first and second aphorisms of the Śivasūra.

These can be read separately as well as together. In the first case we have: caitanyam

ātmā + jñānaṁ bandhaḥ i.e. ʻthe Self is consciousness’ and ‘knowledge is bondageʼ. In
the second case we read ‘caitanyam ātmājñānam bandhaḥ’, which can be broken up
into ‘caitaīyam ātmā + ‘ajñānam bandhaḥ’, i.e. `the Self is consciousness’ and
‘ignorance is bondage’. Read together the privative suffix ‘a’ is added to the word
‘jñānamʼ (‘ʻknowledge’) to make ‘ajīānam’, which means ‘absence of knowledgeʼ. By
reading the two aphorisms ‘together and separately the sense is that common day-today empirical knowledge is the ignorance that fetters consciousness, which is the

individual soul’s most authentic nature.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


(the initial word of the second aphorism). This is the meaning. The word
‘ignorance’ denotes incomplete knowledge.


He says this:


aa āā Ṭ̄] |I 2¢ /11
fītT-āī āī fikaṁ ar sēzoi J aā |
aā ̄a fr-T-GTA
̄TṬ-T || 3<II
T̃ Tā ūPAĀTTTTṬTITTHTTTT
II 30 1|
caitanyam iti bhāvāntaḥ śabdaḥ svātantryamātrakam |
anākṣiptaviśeṣaṁ sad āha sūtre purātane | 28 ||
dvitīyena tu sūtreṇa kriyāṁ vā karaṇaṁ ca vā |
bruvatā tasya cinmātrarūpasya dvaitam ucyate || 29 ||
dvaitaprathā tad ajñānaṁ tucchatvād bandha ucyate |
tata eva samucchedyam ity āvṛttyā nirūpitam || 30 ||

The word (for) ‘consciousness’ (caitanya) is an abstract noun,”

which indicates that (consciousness is not some ‘thing’). It is just (a state of
unconditioned) freedom (svātantrya) (from inhibition) which is Being-assuch (sat) devoid of (any) specification (anākṣiptaviśeṣa). (This is what Śiva)
says in the first aphorism (of the Śivasūātras). By uttering the second

aphorism (‘knowledge is bondage’, Śiva) declares that the (binding) duality
of that pure conscious nature (is empirical knowledge,) whether it (is

considered to be) the act (of knowing in itself) or the instrument (by means

of which something is known).
The ignorance of that (nondual consciousness) is the perception
(prathā) of duality which, because it is petty (tuccha) (and worthless in

relation to the nondual awareness of being conscious),” is said to be

‘ This verse is quoted in MM p. 30. Instead of pradarśitaḥ the reading there is

prakāśitaḥ which means practically the same. Maheśvarānanda explains that ‘what is

meant here essentially is as follows. The Supreme Lord, as knowledge and action, is the
Light (of consciousness and its) reflective awareness. The Impurity called ‘Individual’
arises when there is a lack of awareness, even partially, of His state as the knower, that
is, the one who is reflectively aware (of His own nature).”

“! Abstract nouns denote an entity independently of its attributes, that is, its essential

nature alone, devoid of any concrete individuation as a specific entity. See PV 1/61-62

and ĪP 1/5/12-13 and commentary. Also Torella 1987: 156-160; 2002: 119, notes 24 and
25.

The integral nature of the absolute allows for the existence of the binding world of

objectively perceivable phenomena along with the pure subjectivity of consciousness.
The two represent opposite polarities of a single reality. Of these two, objectivity is
insignificant (uuccha) with respect to the ultimacy (paramārthatva) of the subject. It is

TANTRĀLOKA

bondage and so should be eliminated. This is what is said (by reading the
second aphorism) in conjunction (with the first) (āvṛttyā) (so that it means
‘ignorance is bondage’). (28-30)
Here (in this world of our experience and according to our view,) there

is nothing at all that is not consciously perceived (cetita), and so the (cognitive)

activity of consciousness (citikriyā) is universal (and common to) all (that is
perceived to exist) (sarvasāmānya). (The alertness of being) conscious

(cetana), which possesses full (and perfect) knowledge and action,” is
(engaged in the act of being conscious and) imparting consciousness (cetayati).
the sphere of negation, in which objectivity presents itself as a void (śūnya) in relation
to the fullness of the subject. See Dyczkowski 1987: 38.

‘Cow-nessʼ is the universal of all cows and so is common to all of them. A higher,

more inclusive universal is ‘animal-ness°, which is common to all animals, not just
cows. In this way there is a hierarchy of universals, such that the lower ones are

pervaded by the higher. The universal that is common to all things, and so is the most
inclusive of all, is consciousness. Everything that exists, according to this view, is
within consciousness as a manifestation of it. According to the attendant conditions, it
may be known to varying degrees by an individual perceiver to be such. Thus, a simple

act of reflective awareness is sufficient for the human perceiver to realise that
consciousness is present in any moment of perception of anything. But even if this

awareness is not operative, some degree of reflective awareness must persist for an
object to be known as it is, that is, for example, as the colour ‘blue’ or ‘pleasure’ In the

absence of awareness entities would simply appear without being known. Sub-atomic
particles appear in this way. But even then, there is some degree of reflective awareness,
which defines the specific nature of an entity sufficiently for one subatomic particle to

differ from another. A higher degree of reflective awareness grasps not only the

individual nature of things, which the human perceiver does by forming thought

constructs which identify it, such as the notion ‘this is a chair’. It also grasps its own

ground and that of all perceptions and their contents, namely consciousness. In other
words, one can say, in a way, that consciousness (not matter) is the universal substance
of all things. Depending on the nature of the entity into which it is formed, differing
degrees of its inherent self-awareness are manifestly known as the perceiving

subjectivity of consciousness, on the one hand, and its capacity to conceive and know

the specific nature of its object and itself, on the other. Thus, the degree of the
development of reflective awareness, in this sense, is marked by levels of subjectivity
set in relation to its corresponding objectivity. The higher the level, the more powerful

the power of reflective awareness. At the highest level, that is the supreme subject,
Supreme Śiva Himself, it is in its fullest most developed form; it is the very nature of
consciousness as the reflective awareness of its perfectly free and all-embracing nature,

devoid of any objectivity and the divisions or specifications it entails, common to all

things as their essential nature into which it freely forms itself. Thus, this full and
perfect knowledge is also its unconditioned freedom to be everything as pure

consciousness, untouched by diversity or change.
We can also translate it as ‘full (and perfect) cognitive activity’ (pārṇajñānakriyā).
Cf. ĪP 1/5/12, where Utpaladeva is clearly referring to the first aphorism of the Śivasūtra

— ‘the Self is consciousnessʼ understood as ‘sentience’:

‘Thuṣ, the Self has been defined as ‘consciousness’ (caitanya), meaning by this

the activity of consciousness in the sense of being the agency of this activity. It is thanks
to consciousness that the Self differs from insentient reality.’ Torella’s translation with

adaptations.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Its state of being is ‘consciousness’ (caitanya), which is endowed with full (and

perfect) knowledge and action. That itself is said to be the freedom (of

consciousness) which is (Śiva’s) supreme sovereignty (aiśvarya).” He says that

(by declaring that consciousness is) ‘just (a state of unconditioned) freedom

(svātantrya) (from inhibition)’. (What is meant by saying that consciousness

is) ʻjust (a state of unconditioned) freedom (svātantrya) (from inhibition)”
(is that it is nothing but) just freedom alone, and so he says that it is ‘devoid of
(any) specification (anākṣiptaviśeṣa). (The meaning is,) no specifications are
attributed to it, including those that (invariably) accompany it (and are intrinsic

to it), such as permanence, pervasiveness and the like, due to which there (may

be) types (of consciousness or relative distinctions within it). (The word
caitanyam meaning ‘consciousness’ is an abstract noun, and) an ‘abstract
nounʼ (bhāvapratyayāntaḥ śabdaḥ) only denotes (an entity) devoid of its other
atṭendant attributes. Thus a specification (viśeṣa) (i.e. an adjective) pertains
(only) to a word that denotes a substance. As they say:
‘A word belonging to a particular (linguistic) convention

(saṁketabheda) (may) refer to other attributes (of the entity denoted by it) or
not, as one who knows (the convention) wishes. This is the difference (without
exception) in every case between (words) that denote (the abstract) state of
being (of an entity i.e. abstract nouns) (bhāva) and a substance (i.. proper

Consciousness is Śiva, who is the sovereign Lord and master of all things, which He

creates, sustains, and destroys. He is absolute, supreme and one because of his
‘lordshipʼ. He is not just the Lord of a world order as are some gods who possesses

inferior, limited lordship. His lordship governs all that exists and so is ‘supremeʼ. It is

His perfect unconditioned freedom, by virtue of which He is not only free of all
limitations, that is, perfectly autonomous, He is free to do and know everything, and so
is perfectly and supremely creative. Śiva’s freedom — svātantrya — is thus His ‘creative
autonomyʼ. The following verse of the ĪP (1/5/13) identifies this freedom with the
reflective awareness of consciousness, which is Supreme Speech (concerning which see
above note 371): ʻ(The power of) consciousness (citi) is reflective awareness. It is
Supreme Speech that arises spontaneously. That is the (supreme) primary (mukhya)

freedom and sovereignty of the Supreme Self.’
‘ The point is that consciousness is not qualified in any way as being ‘this or that’
consciousness. Nor are there varieties of consciousness derived from its inherent

qualities as being, for example, pervasive and eternal, such that there are ‘eternal’ or
‘pervasive’ types of consciousness.

”’ The abstract noun ‘cow-ness’ denotes this one fundamental qualiy of a cow, that is,

the specific nature only cows possess. The cow is the ‘substance’ that possesses
qualities, such as colour, the fact that it has four legs, and gives milk etc. In this context,
‘cow-nessʼ is a primary, inherent quality that cannot be separated from a cow, whereas
its colour, for example, is a secondary, non-inherent quality. A cow may be brown or
white, but it cannot be devoid of ‘cow-nessʼ, nor can that ‘cow-ness’ vary in different

cows and so have any particular qualities of its own. Thus, in a sense, the ‘substance’ of
a cow is its ‘cow-ness’.

” Abstract nouns denote an entity (or ‘substance’) independently of its attributes. But if

the speaker so desires, they may also be qualified by adjectives denoting specific
attributes of that entity. See note 371, above.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘By the second (aphorism) — that is, by the word ‘knowledge’ in the
second aphorism (which declares that ‘knowledge is bondage’). ‘Knowledge’ is
the act of knowing (jñapti), and the means by which (something) is known
(yena jñāyate). So, in accord with this etymology, (knowledge) primarily
denotes ‘the act (of knowing in itself) or the instrument (by means of which
something is known)” of that (consciousness) the nature of which has been
declared (in the first aphorism, which states that) ‘the Self is consciousness’.

Thus consciousness (cit) is that which imparts sentience (cetayate), that is, it is
the agent (engaged) in the activity of consciousness (citikriyā). ‘It is said that
that is the (binding) duality° of that, ‘the nature’ of which is ‘pure

consciousnessʼ alone. (In other words, he) refers to the perception of duality by

alluding (in this way) to the agent (of knowledge) and the (resultant) act (which
is knowledge,) as well as between the agent (of the act of knowing), (the
resultant) act (which is knowledge), and the act (of knowing itself,) which are
different (bhinna) and condition (one another). The meaning is that (the fettered
soul) does not know (nākhyāti) (the inherently) complete (and all-embracing)
(pūrṇa) nature of that (pure consciousness). Thus, by not knowing the complete
(and all-embracing) (pūrṇa) nature of consciousness (sarṅvid), which is
nondual, that ‘experience of duality° is itself ‘ignorance’, that is, incomplete
knowledge. And because it is incomplete, that (knowledge) is called ‘bondage’,
which is the triple Impurity, as knowledge that has been contracted in many

ways by the sense of incompleteness (apūrṇamanyatā) (due to the innate
Impurity of the soul), the auspicious and inauspicious latent traces (produced by
the Impurity of Karma), and the body, worlds and forms (produced by the
Impurity of Māyā).
That ignorance ‘should be eliminatedʼ, because it is bondage. The
meaning is that it should be abandoned, in accord with the teaching:
‘Itis said that every impurity, (whether it be) Karma, Māyīya or Āṇava,

should all be abandoned . . .

Surely (one may ask the following.) Here (in this view), because
incomplete knowledge is the experience of duality, then that itself is ignorance,

(bu how has this come to be understood (to be s0)? With this doubtin mind, he
, ‘(If the second aphorism is read) in conjunction (with the first)

iniṣa (so that the form is ‘ignorance is bondage’), it is said that the

perception (prathā) of duality is the ignorance of that (nondual
consciousness). (Reading the second aphorism) ‘in conjunction’ (with the
first, instead of reading jñānaṁ bandhaḥ — ‘knowledge is bondage’,) it (reads)

Read kriyāṁ vā karaṇaṁ ca vā for kṛiyāṁ karaṇaṁ ca.
Read apūrṇamanyatā- for apūrṇaṁ manyatā-.

MV 1/16abc. Instead of mmalaṁ karma ca māyīyam āṇavam akhilaṁ ca yat, the MV
reads malaḥ karma ca māyā ca māyīyam akhilaṁ jagat.

Read by itself, the second sātra says that ‘knowledge is bondage’. Read together with
the previous one, it says ‘ignorance is bondage’. So in the first case we have caitanyam

ātmā, jñānaṁ bandhaḥ andin the second we have caitanyam ātmājñānaṁ bandhaḥ. The
‘a’ of ajñānaṁ (‘ignorance’) fusesin euphonic combination with the final

The point is that incomplete knowledge, which is binding, is ignorance.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘ignorance’ ((ajñānaṁ) is bondage (handhaḥ), by repeating it again due to (the
two aphorisms) coming together (the one aphorism becomes two)).

Surely then, (one may object that) one should define liberation

accordingly. With this doubt in mind, he says:

TTTTĪĪTTHĪTTĪTTHQ ṬFJĪSṬFSTSTT āaT |

TaI |321

svatantrātmātiriktaṣ tu tuccho ‘tuccho ‘pi kaścana |
na mokṣo nāma ta nāsya pṛthaṅnāmāpi gṛhyate || 31 |
Liberation is not some (separate reality), whether insignificant
(tuccha) or significant (atuccha), that differs from the Self that is free;

(indeed,) one does not even use a different name (for it).

(The implied) remaining part of the sentence is that (liberation) is not
something other (than the liberated Self). If (iiberation is) ‘insignificant’, then
iṉ accord with the teaching stated previously (in the preceding verse), it would
just be bondage (that does affect the true nature of the Self); and (if it is)
‘significant’, then it is ultimately real, and so it does not differ from the Self,

that is free. As he will say:

‘Liberation is nothing but the (full and complete) experience (prathana)

of one’s own nature. And the nature of the Śelf
is (pure) consciousness.

Literally: ‘even its name is not taken separately°. In other words, knowledge of the

Self, which is inherently free, is itself liberation. Swami Lakshmanjoo, commenting on

this verse, says: “Mokṣa [liberation] occurs when your being becomes absolutely
independent from all sides. Without that svātantrya [freedom] whatever exists in this

world would be tuccha (i.e. worthless) and is not mokṣa [liberation]. He writes
(1995 p.
13): ʻliberation is nothing at all apart from the Self that is free, whether it be

insignificant (i.e. consisting of duality) or significant (i.e. consisting of nonduality).”

(translated from Hindi). See following note.

Abhinava is borrowing here from the terminology of Advaita Vedānta. The world

according to that view is an illusion. It is like a dream, which does have some existence,

because it undeniably appears, but has no persisting, ultimate existence, as we know

when we wake up from it. The dream, the Advaita Vedāntin says, is ‘insignificant’, a
‘trifle’ — tuccha. The world of daily life which seems s0 vast and important, is very
small and unimportant compared to the Brahman, which is not so (atuccha). Abhinava
is saying that liberation and the Self are literally the same reality — not like two things

that are ṣo similar that one can say they are ‘the same’. The former is not an
‘insignificant illusion. Nor can it be said to be a substantial, independent
reality,

because the only one that can be such must be truly, ultimately existent. Thus, if it is so

then it is the Self. These arguments are directed against two basic views. One is the
Advaita view that, as the world is an illusion, then so is bondage and hence
also
liberation. The other is the dualist view that the world and bondage do exist, and
so do

liberation from the world of tansmigratory existence and the fettered state that binds the
soul to it.

Below 1/156abc. Also quoted below in TĀv ad 1/331 (330) and ad 16/90cd-93ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

What is the point? (The point is that) here at least, there is no
disagreement that knowledge of the Self is liberation. Thus, the characterizing
feature of the Self (i.e. freedom) is also that of liberation. So, because there is no

difference between them, no separate characterizing feature has been stated for

that which is already proved to possess it. Thus, when he says that ‘one does
not even use a different name (for it)ʼ, the word ‘even’ indicates that (if this is
s0,) what question could there be with regards to (its) characterizing feature and
the like?

Although this is (true), he begins to define the nature of liberation
taught in other philosophies in order to clarify how (our view) differs from that.

[IUEEIGEAḤ

|| 33 11
yat tu jñeyasatattvasya pūrṇāpūrṇaprathātmakam ḷ

taduttarottaraṁ jñānaṁ tattatsaṁsāraśāntidam || 32 ||
The perception of the object of knowledge, along with the

metaphysical principles that constitute it, which is full or less complete, is

the knowledge that, increasingly higher, quells each corresponding (form

of) transmigratory existence.

‘The object of knowledge’ is the Path consisting of the Forces,

Principles and Worlds etc., ‘along with the metaphysical principles that

constitute itʼ, that is, (their) mutually separate (distinct) and progressively

higher condition (avasthāna). The ‘knowledge’ (of the object) is ‘imcreasingly
higherʼ by its ever more elevated state, progressively traversing each world
order etc. (one after another), because each (corresponding) limitation ceases

and so (becomes) accordingly (more and more) excellent. Thus, because (it

develops in stages in this way and) because it is essentially the experience of
duality, even when in a contracted state, ‘knowledge is a full or less complete
perception (of the object). It arises by crossing over the network of principles
that have been placed on a lower level with respect to that, and so ‘quells’, that
is, liberates, from the corresponding ‘(form of) transmigratory existence’, that
is, the fourteen kinds of rebirth, because, as is said: ‘the sphere of

transmigratory existence is said to be of fourteen kinds’. This is the meaning.
Read pūrṇāpūrṇaprathātmakam for pūrṇapūrṇaprathātmakam.

Cf. below, 4/29-32ab. Swami Lakshmanjoo: ‘The essence of that which is worth

perceiving is Śiva, and as that perception becomes full in succession, the fuller it

becomes, the closer you are to mokṣa [liberation]. What some Masters consider to be
full, for others is incomplete. Complete fullness is only attained in Śaivism, even though
[devotees of other lower schools] are liberated to a degree by their own [conception of]

‘Ś Read pūrṇāpūrṇaprathātmakaṁ jñānam fo pūrṇapāūrṇaprathātmakaṁ
jñānam.

SVT 10/59ab. A note to the Sanskrit texts explains that: ‘Iis said that transmigratory

existence is of fourteen kinds, as (follows): ‘The divine beings are conceived to be of


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


The (primary) nature (dharma) of knowledge (in this sense) is that it liberates.

It is the (fully) uncontracted state of the contracted (knowledge and
consciousness of the fettered soul)."' He explains that:

TṬTRTFJT

TTTĪ
āTāaTSTT

ā Tafd
radī
dīa: 1| 331|
rāgādyakaluṣo ‘smy antaḥśīūnyo ‘haṁ kartṛtojjhitaḥ |

itthaṁ samāsavyāsābhyāṁ jñānaṁ muñcati tāvataḥ || 33 ||
“I am unsullied by attachment and the like”, “I am inwardly

empty” and “I am not an agent”” — this kind of knowledge, whether
collectively or individually (samāsavyāsābhyāṅṁī), liberates from (only) that

much (bondage).”

‘This kind of knowledge’, which is described in the first half (of this

verse), ‘liberates (only) from that much’ limited bondage, that is, intellectual
and other (forms of ignorance). This is the prose order (saṅbandha). There (in

that context), the knowledge that “I am unsullied by attachment and the like
is that of the (followers of the Buddhist school of idealism called) Yogācāra. As
they say:
“The Buddhas (jina), free of obscuring coverings, have said in brief that

transmigratory existence is the mind (citta) sullied by attachment and the like.

Freedom” from that is liberation.

Again:


eight (kinds), the (types of) animal births are of five kinds, and that of man, one kind.
(This), in brief, is the (gross) elemental (bhautika) creation.’

Omit kiritu, as do all the MSs.

! Knowledge that liberates is the state of pure, unconditioned consciousness. It is itselṝ
the liberated state of the contracted consciousness of the fettered soul. In other words,

consciousness has two aspects. One is perpetually ‘uncontractedʼ, that is, unconditioned
and perfect, and so is never bound. It is the liberated state of the other aspect of
consciousness, which is ‘contracted’ to varying degrees by the power of the freedom of

the former to impose upon itself the limitations of the impurities that contract it. Other
forms of knowledge may correspond to degrees of expansion, but they are limited to the
same degree and so not ultimately liberating.

Literally — ‘I aṃ devoid of agencyʼ.
See K.C. Pandey 1963a: 318. Swami Lakṣhmanjoo: ‘[Collectively or individually]

means that [some] are freed individually or collectively, that is, someone may be free
from one or more mala, whereas others are freed completely of all the malas
[collectively] (samāsyena). 1t is [collectively] from their point of view, not from the
ŚSaiva point of view. [Individually] one can only be free from māyīyamala [the impurity

of Māyā].
MSs Ch, Ñ, T and Ḍ read viviktatā (‘separation’ (from)) instead of vimuktatā
(‘freedomʼ (from)).

TANTRĀLOKA

‘This mind is (self-) luminous; impurities are, by (their very) nature,

(just) adventitious, (not innate to it). When they cease, that light which is the
goal of all (sarvārtha) (shines) imperishable.

This is the meaning here (of these lines). (According to the Yogācāra,)
the mind (citta) is luminous by nature, (but) due to beginningless ignorance it is
covered by adventitious impurities such as attachment and the like.
Transmigratory existence arises due to this. But even so, by destroying each of

these adventitious impurities by the power of assiduously pursuing (anuṣṭhāna)

the path of the practice of meditation (bhāvanā) and the like, it brings about a
reversal (from the ignorant to the enlightened perspective) in the (deepest) seat
(of consciousness) (āsrayaprāvṛiti). It is due to that that liberation, which is
the manifestation of (the mind’s) innate, indestructible luminous nature (is
attained).
(We say that) that (view) is unsound. You (Yogācāra Buddhists)
maintain that meditation (bhāvanā) is the cause here (of liberation). (However,
meditation) cannot impart a (different) quality to the (transitory) moments of the
mind that cease at each instant, because (meditation) can (only) impart (a
particular) quality (to it) by being present in a single stable underlying

foundation, (which you do not admit exists).” Stable entities (that persist for
some time), such as sesame seeds, are perfumed by stable (persistent) pleasant
(smells). This (mind) should also be such. (However, the stream of the mind)

arises as new (and unique) (apūrva) every moment, like the repeated passing
of (something that is) discontinuous and transitory. (Thus,) the meditation of a

moment of the mind that has not reached excellence cannot give rise to (that)
moment (which corresponds to) the luminous (enlightened) mind. So what is the
purpose of that (meditation)? Sullied (samala) moments of the mind (born) from
their own spontaneous power to give rise to similar (ones) are (only) capable of
generating moments of the mind that are similar (to themselves), not dissimilar,

luminous ones. Meditation would be incapable in this way of destroying

impurity, because (each) moment of the mind is transitory." So what is (all

this) talk of a reversal (from the ignorant to the enlightened perspective) in the
(deepest) seat (of consciousness) (āśrayaprāvṛtti)? Thus, this is all the liberation
MSs Kh, Ch, J, h and T read prakṛtyā tanavo malāḥ — ‘impurities are, by (their very)
nature, (just) corporeal (i.e. not innate to the mind)’.

One could also translate ~ ‘which is all that there is'.

PV 2/208. Also quoted below in TĀv ad 4/29-30, in the ĪPVv ad 1/5/4. The previous

line reads: vyāvṛttau pratyayāpekṣam adṛḍhaṁ sarpabuddhivat | ‘The discernment of
difference depends on (one's) perception (of it) (pratyaya), which is as unstable as is the
notion (that a rope seen in the dark is) a snake.”

The term ‘āśrayaparāvṛtti’ literally means ‘reversal of the foundation’. I borrow

Suzuki’s translation which, although less literal, is closer to the spirit of the intended
seēnse.

The mind is momentary and so cannot be permanently affected by meditation or the
like, because there is no stable underlying foundation of the mind.

“/Instead of pratikṣaṇam apūrvatvena upajāyamānasya (arising as new (and unique)
(apūrva) every momentʼ), MSs Ch and Ñ read: pratikṣṇasamūlatvenopajāyamānasya
(‘ariṣing as rooted every moment’); T: -asamatvena- (-as being imbalanced-); D: samalatvena- (-as sullied’-).

ciṭṭakṣaṇabhaṅgura- literally means: ‘the mind is destroyed at each moment’.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


of those who maintain the doctrine of momentariness amounts to. Liberation
and bondage are only possible in the case of something that is a stable (lasting)
and single (entity) and the like. One who is bound acts (to achieve) liberation,

and once (liberation) is attained, he is indifferent (to all that is binding) (nivṛtta).
A series (santāna) is not a single (entity,) because it is conditioned by notions of

unity and diversity (bhedābheda).

The (partially liberating) knowledge that ‘“I am inwardly,” that is,

within consciousness also, ‘“empty”” is that of the followers of the (Buddhiṣṭ)

Maādhyamika. (These people) maintain that all things are devoid of an essential
nature of their own and, because consciousness is also devoid of an essential

nature of its own, declaring that it is false, say that liberation is (attained) in

that emptiness itself. As they say:

‘The purpose of the sage’s teaching that ‘this universe is only mind

(cittamātra) is to remove children’s fear of it, but in reality that is not so. Those

who (are most eminent and) greatly fortunate have destroyed even that state

which is ‘only mind."”

“ A series is both a unity, in the sense that it is a single series, but is also made of
separate units that differ from one another. If we try to understand what it is, the notions

we can form of it are necessarily both of a unity and a diversity.

“ Read with MSs Ch, J, Ñ, T and Ḍ -abhidadhantas- for -abhidadhatas-.
. These lines are drawn from the Bodhicittavivaraṇa, attributed to Nāgārjuna. The

lacunose text, edited by Lindtner, is available at:

Lindtner ascribes the authorship of the Bodhicittavivaraṇa to Nāgārjuna, the wellknown author of the Mīūlamadhyamakakārikās (MMK) who flourished around
150 CE.
However, Buescher (2008: 36-40) argues convincingly against this view. I am
grateful

to Dr. Buescher for this reference.
The first sentence corresponds to verse 27. The version of the edited text reads

uttrāsaparihārārthaṁ (‘to remove intense fear’) for tattrāsaparihārārthaṁ (‘to

remove

the fear of it’). The following line corresponds to verse 25cd. The edited text reads

citamātravyavasthayā (‘by the state of Mind Onlyʼ) for cittamātravyavasthitiḥ (‘the
state of Mind Only). This variant is intelligible, and indeed may be seen to be the
better

reading, by reference to the context. The sequence of these lines is reversed with respect

to that of the edition of the Bodhicittavivaraṇa. Read together with the preceding
line
translating the edited text, we get:
‘[The purpose of the teaching concerning the aggregates is to bring about the
end of clinging (to the false notion of) Self.] Those who (are most eminent and)
greatly
fortunate destroy even that (instruction concerning the existence of the aggregate
s) by
the state of Mind Only.’ (25) (followed by a lacuna in the edited text) . . . The
purpose

of the teaching of the sage that ‘this universe is Mind Only (cittamātra) is to remove
children’s great fear, but in reality that is not so.’
Read in reverse, as Jayaratha does, the variant found here makes more sense
and so has been accepted.

The term cittamātra here translated in capitals as ‘Mind Onlyʼ has been
understood to refer to consciousness as the fundamental reality which is Emptiness.
What has been called the One Mind. However, the sense of ‘mind only can also be,
according to the context, that nothing exists in an objective physical or material sense.

TANTRĀLOKA

(According to us,) that also is not a sound view. If the autonomous
nature of consciousness is also denied because it is false, (then) there would be

no Being (sartā) in falsity (i.e. even that would not exist). This is because,

(unlike objects) such as (the perceived colour) blue and the like, (Being) is not

relative. Moreover, if the autonomous nature of (sensorial phenomena) such
as (the colour) blue and the like is also denied because they are false, their
condition (avasthāna) is that of the nature of consciousness. Being itself would

not be within consciousness, which is just the essence of manifestation
(sphurattāmātrasāra), because it is false, and so nothing would manifest. Thus
(all) there would be is just a state of unconsciousness (mitrchā). It is impossible
to deny that consciousness, which is the essence of manifestation, is
something.

Now, it is said (by Nāgārjuna) that:

‘It is void of all supporting attributes (ālambanadharma), all beings, all

impediments and residues (of past actions) (āśaya).” It is not void in the
ultimate sense (paramārthataḥ).”
If (one affirms), in accord with this stated principle, that (reality is)

devoid of (any) conceived (kalpita) form, such as the relationship between
subject and object but not of consciousness also, that would amount to an
acceptance of the aforementioned Buddhist idealist view (vijñānavāda). (Thus,)

as that too is devoid of (any) conceived or relative nature and the like (these

Buddhists say that):


The dreams we have are made by, and are, ‘just the mind. The world we see in a dream,

the beings that populate it, and even ourselves who participate in it, are just figments of
the activity of the mind, which is itself, like the dream, unreal. To say that ‘the universe

is only mind amounts to saying that it is a mental construct, an illusion. Dreams are

also ‘only mind’. The complete form of this expression is ‘cittadṛṣyamātra’, i.e. the

universe is ‘only an object perceived by the mind’. Thus an equivalent expression is that
the universe is ‘bhrāntimātra’ ‘just an illusion’ʼ.

“ An illusion exists even if its contents do not. An illusion has being, but it is not the
specific being of a particular entity, which is defined as what it is by not being anything

else. The ‘being’ of an illusion is just existence, which is not relative, as is that of some
particular existent.

Read

with

MSs

sphurattāmātrasārarūpāyā.

G,

1,

Jh,

N,

and

D

sphuratāsārarāpāyā

for

’’ Monier-Williams reports two pertinent meanings of the term ‘āśaya’ — 1) disposition
of mind, mode of thinking (in Yoga philosophy); 2) stock or the balance of the fruits of
previous works, which lie stored up in the mind in the form of mental deposits of merit

or demerit until they ripen in the individual soul's own experience into rank, years, and
enjoyment. (Cowell's translation of Sarvadarśanasaṁgraha. 168, 16 ff.)

“In other words, ultimate reality is said to be Void because it is devoid of all
contingencies, not because it does not really exist. This verse is also quoted by
Kṣemarāja in his commentary (nirṇaya) on SpKā 12-13. There sarvasattvair reads

sarvatattvair in the second half of the first line. The meaning then is ‘all metaphysical

principlesʼ instead of ‘all beingsʼ. Kṣemarāja tells us that the verse is by Nāgārjuna, the
great expounder of Buddhist school of the Middle Way, the Mādhyamika. It is quoted
again below ad 6/10ab.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

‘This universe is the radiant manifestation of the mind (antaḥkaraṇa)

alone, which is the unperceived'” reality (tattva) that makes what is

wonderfully varied, manifest.”

According to this and other similar statements (you idealist Buddhists

make) accepting consciousness (vijūapti) to be ultimately real, you

(respected) aged people have not noticed (utprekṣita) anything new. The defect
there (of your conception of consciousness) has (already) been discussed.'

“I am not an agent” is the (partial, binding) knowledge of those who

(accept the) Sāṁkhya (view), maintaining as they do that the Self is inactive.

Otherwise (they say, if it were active) it would not possess consciousness,

because only insentient entities are perceived to be active (kriyāvat), as is, for

example, milk (when it changes into curd). (According to us) this (view) is

unsound, because an inactive Self would not be liberated. If the individual soul
(puruṣa).does not do anything, even if the discriminating insight has arisen
(whereby he discerns the difference between himself as eternal consciousness,
free of all the consequences of the activity of Nature, which is the perpetually
active sphere of objectivity that apparently binds him), he would not abide as
(his) own essential (conscious) nature. This is because it is not possible that

Nature, the very nature of which is activity (pravṛtti), to be aloof (and inactive),
because it is possible for (that) activity to arise again for that (individual soul
and affect it). Nor does Nature have (the capacity) to determine that “I have
been seen by him” or “I will not act again for that purpose (which the soul

proposes)”, because, as it is insentient," it is incapable of perception.
" Eyen if

‘ MSs K, Ch, Jh, N, T, and Ḍ read avabhāsita- ʻmanifested for avibhāvita-

‘unperceivedʼ.
! Note that the word for consciousness used here is vijñapti, which is originally a
Buddhisṭ term.
! Read tatra cokto doṣaḥ for tatra cokto doṣah.
! The view here, accepted by a number of schools in various forms, is that causality is
a single continuous process, as is action. The cause is the agent of the effect, which is

the result of its activity. The Pratyabhijñā

view is that the agent is always ultimately

consciousness, which is thus the universal cause of everything operating through

particular causes that give rise to their specific effects. However, Sāṁkhya does not

accept the agency of consciousness, which it maintains is inactive. Áctivity, including
the production of effects from their causes, is only perceived to take place in the sphere

of objectivity, that is, Nature (prakṛt). Consciousness, which is the individual Self, is

just a passive perceiver of Nature’s permutations.

‘ Read with MSs Ch, J, Jh, N, T. and D: pravrttisambhāvanāyāḥ for
sambhāvanāyāḥ.

! Read -anusandhānam asty acaitanyād for -anusandhānam astyācaitanyād.
! Nature (prakṛti) is the totality of objectivity. The individual soul is bound by it by
because he wrongly identifies with it, until the realisation dawns that that is a mistake,

and he understands that Nature is purely objective and has nothing to do with himself.
Then Nature feels, as it were, that “the soul has seen me and knows what I am’ and so
retires from the purview of the soul to leave it to be free and independent in its essential,

pure conscious nature. We read in the Sāṁkhyakārikā (19-21, 59, 61, 62, 66):
‘Itis established that the Self (puruṣa) is a pure witness by contrasting it (with
Nature). He is a solitary, neutral spectator, who does nothing. Thuṣ, it is through their

union that insentient (Nature) appears to be intelligent, and conversely, the neutral Self

TANTRĀLOKA

this has taken place in this way, just as when one perceives sound (or any

other object of sense), that objective (artha) (to hear sound) arises again; in the

same way, even when a discriminating assessment (that discerns the difference
between consciousness and insentient Nature) has been made (once), that
(same) objective (artha) (which is to experience daily life) will (certainly) arise
again, because (Nature’s) nature has not ceased to be (such as it is). (In brief,)

although (this liberating act of discernment) has been done in this way, it (is as

if) has not been done.
# . ! (Agaiṇ), even though the knowledge Buddhists (attain) is

limited (saṁīkucita), it does perform the function which is appropriate to its own
(nature).

So

the

(idealist)

Buddhists

(say)

that:

‘this,

the

nature

of

consciousness, is only one, of which we see the many forms of its (continuous)
transformation as joy, sorrow and the rest.’ According to this line of reasoning
(it is clear that) they have arrived at (pratipanna) the metaphysical principle that
corresponds to the knowledge which is the activity of the intellect. Thus their
liberation (amounts) to the attainment of the principle of the intellect
(buddhitattva). That has been said (in the Svacchandatantra):

‘Brahmā resides there in the principle of the intellect as (its) lord. That,

they say, is the supreme, omniscient plane of the Buddhiṣṭs.’

Thus for them, transmigratory existence below the principle of the

intellect is quelled. And so in this way, it is rightly said that ‘liberates from

(only) that much (bondage).’ The followers of the Sāṁkhya have arrived at the
metaphysical principle that corresponds to the condition (avasthāna) in which
the individual soul abides as its own essential nature in a state of separation
from Nature which consists of pleasure and pain etc. Thus their liberation
(amounts) to the attainment of the principle of the individual soul (purṁstattva).
That is said (in the Svacchandatantra);

‘(The principle) of the followers of Sāmkhya is that of the individual

soul which is free of pleasure and pain etc."

appears to be an agent because of the agency of the qualities (guṇa) (of Nature). (The
Soul and Nature work together) like a blind man (who carries) a lame man (on his back
to direct him), so that Nature may be visible to the Self and the Self may act. Creation
proceeds from (their) union. (19-21)

In my opinion nobody is more modest than Nature. Knowing that “I have been

seen”, she no more comes within the sight of the Self. Thus verily the Self is never

bound, nor is he released, nor does he transmigrate. It is Nature, being the support of
this manifold creation, that migrates, is bound and is released. (61-62)

The one Self thinks “T have seen her” and therefore loses all interest. The other
(i.e. Nature) thinks “ḹ have been seen” and ceases to act further. Therefore, even if there
is still a connection, there is no reason for any further transformations.’

Delete ceyar.

! Read with MSs Ch, J, N, T, Ḍ: kṛtam akṛtaṁ

" The text appears to be lacunose here. The subject changes abruptly from a criticism
of the Sāṁkhya conception of liberation to that of the (idealist) Yogācāra Buddhists.
! SVṬ 11/68-69ab. Read tatrādhipatyena for tatrādhipatvena.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


The view that maintains the existence of the Self (ātmadrṣṭi) is superior
to the view that denies the existence of the Self (nairātmyadṛṣṭi). Thus, the

knowledge of the followers of the Sāṁkhya with respect to the Buddhiṣṭs is a

(more) complete unfolding of insight, and so they attain the principle of the
individual self, which is above the principle of the intellect. And so in this way,
the point suggested in the previous verse has been established, namely that the

knowledge which (in its own perspective) is a complete unfolding of insight is

increasingly higher (as one progresses to higher systems)." Although the

knowledge of the individual soul as separate from Nature is in this way on an

equal footing (sāmya) for both the followers of the Sāṁkhya and those of

Paṭañjali (the author of the Yogasūtra), (the knowledge) of the followers of

Patañjali is superior to (that of) of the Sāṁkhya, because they meditate with

reverence on the Lord (Iśvara as the supreme soul). Thus it is said that they

aṭtain the level of the Principle of Necessity (niyatitattva), which is above that
of the individual soul. (t is said in the Svacchandatantra):

‘O mistress of the gods, the twenty-sixth (principle) is the supreme
plane in the Yogaśāstra.
In the same way, the supreme plane of the (Śaiva) Mausala and
Pāśupatas onwards is the attainment of correspondingly higher principles in

accord with the (degree of) excellence of (their) knowledge. That is said (there
in the Śvacchandatantra):

‘It is said that the principle of Māyā is that of the Mausula and Kāruka
(Paśupatas).” Again: ‘it is said that (the principle of) Īśvara is the supreme plane

of the Pāśupata vow.”

ṢVṬT 11/70ab. Kṣemarāja comments that: ‘their liberation amounts to only the
attainment of the power of consciousness, which is separate from Nature (that consists
of the experience of) pleasure and pain and the like.”

We have seen that ignorance is not considered here to be a total absence of

knowledge. Rather it is partial knowledge. The liberating knowledge a given system
teaches is full and complete from its own perspective. It is the ‘complete unfolding of
insight (pūrṇaprathā) it teaches.

“ This line corresponds to SYT 11/70cd. The following two correspond to SYT 11/71cd
and 71ab, respectively.
Kṣemarāja, commenting on 11/71ab, writes: ‘Itis said that (the Pāśupata) Tantra is of
two kinds: Lākula and Mausula.” Thus, the Pāśupata (Tantra) is of two kinds. As
Mausula will be explained, the Pāśupata vow that was established by Lākuleśa is

mentioned here. There the supreme plane is the attainment of the Īśvara principle. As
was stated before: ‘those who observe the divine Pāśupata vow and have conquered the

senses, are immersed in ashes, repeat Mantra and meditate (on the deity), go to Īśvara’s
plane.” (10/1169cd-1170ab)
In the case of Pāśupata (doctrine,) in which (ritual) action predominates, (it is
said that) ‘in the case of Mauṣula and Kāruka (Pāśupata), (the plane attained) is said to
be the principle of Māyā. (11/71cd)
The disciple of the venerable Lakuleśa, Musulenda, who came down (to earth)
again (as Lakuleśa did) in the place (called) Kārohaṇa, has taught particular Vows (to
observe) in their own particular scripture, that (entail) much ritual (kriyā) (performed) in

TANTRĀLOKA

In the same way there (in that context), the knowledge of the Buddhists

and the like liberates bit by bit from the impurity of Māyā (māyīyamala)

(according to the view of the particular Buddhist school), that of the Mausulas
from that of Karma as well, and that of the Pāśupatas also from the individual
one (āṇavamala), which is the mistaken notion that the Self is what is not the

Self. Thus it is said that (this kind of knowledge), ‘whether collectively or
individually (samāsavyāsābhyāṁ)ʼ, (liberates from (only) that much

(bondage)).

order to attain Kṣemeśa, Brahmā and Swāmin, who reside in the principle of Māyā.

(Thus) there (in that case) the supreme plane is the principle of Māyā itself.

And one who has entered the principle of Māyā
is ‘Kṣemeśa, Brahmā, and
Swamin, that supreme plane is (their level)’ (11/72ab) in the enumerated order

(respectively). Those also who are the kinds of Pāśupatas called Vaimala, intent on

practicing the aforementioned group of eight Pañcārthapramāṇas, are in another
(category). Their supreme plane is Tejeśa and Dhruveśa, who are present in the Īśvara

principle. Thus (the Tantra) says:

Tejeśa of the Vaimalas is the plane of Dhruva (taught in the) Pramāṇa
(Pāśupata scripture). (11/72cd)
(Itis said of) one who is devoutly dedicated (niṣṭha) to the Pramāṇa scriptures

of the Vaimala that:

‘To the degree that by his (ascetic) conduct (caryā) he observes the Vow of the
Skull up to when he dies, his Self pure with the knowledge (that comes) from initiation,

he goes to his own (corresponding) plane.” (11/73)

With the words ‘his Self pure with the knowledge (that comes) from initiation’,

a peculiarity is indicated with respect to the Mausula and Kāruka, who are dedicated

solely to the aforementioned Vow predominantly based on ritual. Their nature is,

respectively that of Tejeśa and Dhruva. As was said before: “‘Tejeśa and Dhruva is the
supreme plane of the Pramāṇas.” (10/1174)

Those who observe the Vow of the bones, namely, the skull etc., according to
the aforementioned teachings of Lākula, ‘sleep in (a bed of) ashes.” (Pāśpatasūtra 1/3)


Impelled thus by (such injunctions of the) Pāśupata scripture:

‘Dedicated to the recitation of Mantra, (smearing their body with) ashes and
ritual, they go to Īśvara’s plane.” (11/74ab)
Here amongst them, having gone beyond the condition of the principle of
Maāyā, which is the sphere of the Mausula etc., ‘Iśvara’s supreme plane is said to be
(realised) in (the observance of the Pāśupata vow. (I1/71ab) This is stated out of order

in order to present the types of Pāśupatas of the Mauṣula etc.’

Sanderson (2005b: 104 n 45) explains: ‘It is accepted that they [the Pāśupata]
have the power to lead their followers to liberation at the reality-level of Īśvara. This is a
lower liberation (aparā muktiḥ) than that attainable by those who have received full
initiation (nirvāṇadīkṣā or sādhakadīkṣā) in any Śaiva Tantra; but it is a true liberation.
The Pañcārthika Pāśupatas, the Lākulas (also called Mahāyratas and Kālamukhas) and
the Vaimalas are said to realize their scriptures’ salvific potential, but the Mausulas and
Kārukas are held to reach no further than the world-source (māyā), that is to say, the

reality-level that is the upper limit of the impure universe. Or though they follow valid
scriptures they have placed excessive emphasis on rites at the expense of gnosis. For
this view of the Pāśupata systems or elements of it, see below 37/13cd-15;


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Niśvāsaguhya 7/251¢c-252b (f. 67 v 2-3), 71263c-264b (f. 67 v6), 7/269 (f. 68r1-2);
Dīkṣoṭtara 18/123-125, SvT 10/1134-1135b and commentary, SVT 11/70-74 and
commentary. A less generous view is found in the Saiddhāntika Paddhati of

Somaśambhu and in the Siddhāntika scripture Sarvajñānottara. According to the first
the Pāśupatas reach no higher than the world-source and according to the second they
reach not even this level, being ‘liberated’ in Time (kālaḥ), while the other non-Tantric
followers of Śaiva scripture, called Mahāvratas by the first and Somasiddhāntins by the

second, are conceded true liberation by being assigned to the level of Vidyā, just

beneath Īśvara, in the pure universe, see Somaśambhupadáhati vol. 3 p. 553 verse 8ab

and Sarvajñānottara f. 37r2. kevalārthavidaḥ kālaṁ prāpnuvanti jitendriyāḥ.’

See Dyczkowski, 1992a: 57-58. Kṣemarāja offers the following gradation of systems

commenting on PrHṛ 8: ‘The roles that (one reality assumes) are the (ultimate) states
(taught in) all the philosophies' (tadbhūmikāḥ sarvadarśanasthitayaḥ). 1) The
materialist Cārvākas consider the Self to be identical with the sentient body. 2) The
empirical Nyāya identify the Self with the intellect until it is liberated and is then

identified with the void of deep sleep. 3) The Mīmārṁsakas identify the Self with the

ego. 4) The Buddhists consider the activity of the intellect to be the Self. 5). Some
Vedāntins consider the vital breath (prāṇa) to be the Self. 6) Some Vedāntins and the

Mādhyamika Buddhists maintain that ‘nonbeing’ is ultimate reality. 7) The Vaiṣṇava

Pāñcarātra asserts that Viṣṇu is the supreme cause of all things. 8) The Sāṅkhya view

amounts to accepting the state of deep sleep, to which Vijñānākala perceivers are
subject, as ultimate. 9) Some Vedāntins consider Īśvara to be the highest principle

(taītva). 10) The Grammarians believe that the Speech of Vision on the level of the

Sadāśiva principle is supreme. 11) Tāntrikas (presumably the Śaivasiddhāntins)
maintain that the all-transcending Self
is supreme. 12) The Kaulas identify the Self with
the universe. 13) Trika Śaivites maintain that the Self is equally both immanent and

transcendent.

Abhinava dedicates all of chapter thirty below to expound and justify the view
that all philosophical and religious traditions of India, at least, belong to one stream of

insight that originates from Śiva, and so, one may observe, they are all implicitly

ultimately Saiva. Accordingly, they all possess some degree of truth and so do lead to
levels of attainment, but, Abhinava maintains, only Trika leads to the highest level.

Thus it is, in actual fact, the ultimate goal of the lower ones also (30/31-32, see also
37/1-17 and MVV 1/15 ff). AIl other schools stop short at the level they consider to be

the supreme one and so are misguided by the mistaken belief that they have attained the

highest form of liberation. Thus, although their followers do make progress by their
teachings, the same teachings ultimately obstruct their further progress. Indeed, they can

be said to be deceiving themselves because, although they are just fragments of the one

tradition (30/38ab (30/37cd)), they each mistakenly believe themselves to be all of it.

This approach to understanding one’s own school in relation to others is not at all

peculiar to Trika. Indeed, as Torella (2011: 31) notes, the outright rejection of all rival

views is not common in any school of Indian philosophy. ‘Much more widespread,’ he
writes, ‘is a sort of limited acceptance, provided that the rival school — to which a

certain validity is ascribed - is willing to take its place on a rigidly hierarchical scale, at
the top of which one’s own system is enthroned.’ Thus the Siddhāntin Rāmakaṇṭha, who

was an older contemporary of Abhinavagupta, offers a different gradation in his

Paramokṣanirāsakārikā (Stanzas concerning the Refutation of the (views of) Others

regarding Liberation). Most of the twenty odd schools to which he refers are obscure;

nonetheless, the principle of ordering systems in an ascending sequence culminating, of

course, in his own Siddhānta Śaivism, is the same. This is also the standard way in

which Tantric traditions posit themselves in relation to others at the level of revelation.
For example, the Kubjikā Tantras locate other traditions in a hierarchy arranged along

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely, (one may ask,) why is it that even when bondage has fallen
away in this way, as befits one’s own philosophy, one is not liberated? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

īāāTRṬĪTISTTSVIGTTJTTTTR’T

3Tjṝ TJ Trīq āārāzšaāsīā: || 3%I
tasmān mukto ’py avacchedād avacchedāntarasthiteḥ |
amukta eva muktas tu sarvāvacchedavarjitaḥ || 34 ||
Therefore, even though (someone may be) free from (one) limitation

(avaccheda), he is not liberated because other limitations continue to exist.

He who is truly liberated is free of all limitations.

the goddess's body, who is thus all of them, with the highest, her own, at the summit

(see Dyczkowski 2009: intro. 3, 155). The rise from one to the other is marked by an

ascent through a graded series of initiations. This approach is so basic and common that

as new systems develop, they accommodate the others that preceded them on their own
ladders of attainment, just as they may add higher layers of worlds or principles

culminating in their own. Thus, this way of presenting other systems and realities may
serve, in certain cases and to some degree, as an aid for historians to gain an
understanding of their relative age.

The sense of ‘limitation’ here is extroverted awareness centred on objectivity, that

entails a contraction or limitation of subjective consciousness. It is the opposite of the

reflective awareness of supreme subjective consciousness that, free of limitation, is

integral (pūrṇa) and free (svatantra). While the latter is one and without gradations,
there are degrees of limitation corresponding to the degree of objectivity that separation

from subjectivity entails. Abhinava sums up the teaching of verses 23-26 and 32-34 in

his Tantroccaya as follows:
‘It is said in the scriptures that ignorance is the cause of bondage (MVT
1/23cd). (What this means is that) the instrumental cause of the world of transmigration
is an upside-down understanding (of one’s true nature) (viparītaniścaya) (such that what

is not the Self is identified with what is the Self, and what is the Self is identified with
what is not the Self, i.e. the body). And so that is said to be the Impurity (which binds
the soul), and (this) impurity is indeed nothing but ignorance. Thus (it is said that):
‘When the power of complete knowledge arises, all that is uprooted..

When knowledge is not complete, (the degree of) liberation is consonant with

the degree in which there is correct knowledge, and that is entirely due to the

manifestation of the corresponding state of subjectivity that transcends it. When
knowledge is complete, the subject who transcends all things and is all things manifests
as being of the nature of Śiva Himself. For this reason, there is no ignorance anywhere

in any aspect of that (supreme subject). And (so it is said that) liberation (is achieved)

when knowledge (i.e. one's own consciousness), in which all Impurity has been
deṣṭroyed, manifests. Liberation is nothing else but this. Rather, liberation is the light of

the principle of consciousness, which is pure, free, complete, all things and beyond all

things, (and that manifests) when the Impurity of ignorance has ceased. For this reason,
Taṃm clarifying all that should be known by means of this treatise (śāstra).


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘A Path is the cause of bondage.'
According to this teaching (of the
Svacchandatantra), a Path is binding to varying degrees (tāvat).” There the
Buddhists and the like are liberated from it (to some extent) by the falling away

of bondage up to the end of the principle of the intellect, but even so, ‘because
other limitations continue to exist of the Path above it, they are not (truly)
liberated. Thus, they are emitted again at the beginning of a (new cycle of)

creation, and so transmigratory existence (again) comes into being (for them), as

the cause of bondage has not been totally destroyed. As (Abhinavagupta) will

say:

‘At the beginning of a (new) day (of creation), Śrīkaṇṭha again emits
those who have mastered the Sāṁkhya or the Veda and the rest. Therefore, this

kind of liberation is not proper (and complete) (samyak).


Similarly, (we read) in the venerable Svacchandatantra:


‘Worldly souls are subject to repeated creation and destruction.
Mounted on the wheel of transmigratory existence, they are like (the jars of) a

water wheel (ghaṭayantra).

Having explained this in general, the following is said in particular with
the intention of characterizing one who has been liberated by Buddhist and other
subordinate philosophies:
‘Freed from bondage, the Lord binds him again. The bondage due to the
world of transmigration (binds) repeatedly as long as he does not attain God.’
° SYṬ 10/358d. Also quoted below ad 16/207cd-208ab (208).

See below, 1/77ab-80ab (1/77-80). The Path (adhvan) consists of two sets of three
parallel series of realities. They mark stages of emanation in the descending sequence

and withdrawal in ascent. One set of three is the objective order denoted by Speech

(vācya), and the parallel set of three are the corresponding forms of Speech that are their
denotators (vācaka). The denotated are, from gross to subtle, the world-orders
(bhuvana) (described in chapter 8 below), the metaphysical principles (tattva)
(described in chapter 9 below), and the spheres of the Forces (kalā) (described in
chapter 11). They are contained in one another, as are their corresponding denotators,
Mantras, parts of Mantras (pada), and phonemes (varṇa), respectively. The individual

soul traverses this Path, step by step, to reach Śiva in the course of initiation by means

of the denotators. Although the Path is ultimately liberating if one ascends through it,
the stages along it when descending represent the factors which progressively bind the
soul as they constitute the means and factors that make binding worldly experience

possible. Piled one above the other, the further down the soul is on the Path, the greater

the degree of bondage. Conversely, as he rises, step by step, he is freed of the form and

degrees of bondage at the lower levels he has abandoned. See note to 6/34-35 and
Dyczkowski 1992a: 102 ff. and for a detailed exposition, Padoux 1990: 330 ff.
" Below 6/152cd-153ab (152); also quoted below ad 9/187.

SYT 11/185cd-186ab.

ṢVṬ 12/51cd. MS Kh and Ch read: yāvad dehaṁ na vindati as long as he does not
attain the bodyʼ and MS J reads: yāvat mokṣaṁ na vindati as long as he does not attain

liberation’. The SvT and commentary supply the context:

TANTRĀLOKA

Whereas, only one for whom all the bondage of the Path has ceased

entirely (without residue) is visibly (sākṣā) a liberated soul. As he says: ‘he

who is (truly) liberated is free of all limitations’. As is said (in the

Svacchandatantra):


‘the Śaivites supreme plane has gone forth (beyond) the entire Path.!
So too: ‘the accomplished Śaivite shines on the head of (all) others.

(Truly) liberated, he does not come again (here) below when (there is a new)

creation.’

The instrumental means (nimitta) here (to achieve total liberation) is

this kind of (completely) full (and perfect) knowledge. So he says:

‘The body is made of the twenty-four (principles) and possesses senses.’

(12/48cd) One should know that to be made of Prakṛti (and that) it impels (both)

Dharma and Adharma. ʻBy the activities of the mind, speech and body it accrues

Dharma etc., (whereas) I (who am the Self) am devoid of the qualities (of Prakṛti) and
am not an agent. (12/49abc) Thus one who is separate from Prakṛti (experiences that):
‘“T am not subject to the bondage of Prakṛti.”” (12/49d) ‘“ consider,” all this is only to
be ‘the product of the activity of Prakṛti.' (12/50a) Ī ascertain that it is impelled by
means of the intellect and the rest (of the senses). By the arising of this kind of
discrimination ‘one is released from the (binding) latent impression (of past action).

(12/50b) A latent impression is a residual trace (of past action) (saṅtskāra). The one

who ‘is released is the Sāṅkhya monk. That is this ‘ḹ have taught this knowledge of the
Sāṅkhya by virtue of which one is liberated from Prakṛti.’ In a short time one is separate
(from that).

‘Freed from bondage, the Lord binds him again. The bondage due to the world

of transmigration (binds) repeatedly as long as he does not attain God. The Lord is the

agent of emanation, who binds all living beings.’ (12/51-52ab)

As insentient Prakṛti cannot assume the agency of (the sentient) individual
soul, and that (soul) does not accept (its association with Prakṛti), (then) even when they
are in contact, the universe would not arise. (However,) as long as the Lord does not
assume (His role as) the agent of their release from bondage, although liberated by the

Sāṅkhya (teaching), (the soul) returns back again because a (full) knowledge of reality
has not arisen. SvT 11/316-12/157 is drawn from the Niśvāsanaya (Sanderson 2001:

28).

V ṢVṬ 1I/7Acd.

Read with MSs Ch, J, Jh, N, T, and D: mārdhnītareṣāṁ for mārdhnātareṣāṁ.

Jayaratha ofien uses the word ‘nimitta’ in his commentary. It literally means an

‘instrumental cause’, ‘means’, ‘reason’ or ‘purpose’. t is the means by which something
is done or achieved and the reason for it. It is the ‘attendant’ or ‘instrumental cause’ of

the primary or ultimate cause (kāraṇa) of something. In this case, the ultimate cause
(kāraṇa) of liberation is Śiva’s grace. Everything else that may serve as a means to it is
an instrumental, attendant cause — even full and perfect knowledge. The meaning of the
word ‘nimitta’ does include the sense of ‘means’ to something, but it is so insofar as it is
an instrtumental cause to attain it. The term ‘upāya’ literally means a ‘means’. In this

context, it is a means to realisation. Any means to realisation ~ upāya - is such by the

power of Siva’s grace, and so one could say that it is an ‘instrumental cause’ — nimiṭta —
of realisation. However, the term ‘upāya’ carries with it an added essential connotation
thatit is a consciously applied means to attaining or gaining something. A ‘nimitta’ is an


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


ṃq 3rHTTST

JGTTĒT || 3 , 1A
yat tu jñeyasatattvasya jñānaṁ sarvātmanojjhitam |

avacchedair na tat kutrāpy ajñānaṁ satyamuktidam || 35 |

Knowledge of the object of knowledge (jñeya), along with the
metaphysical principles that constitute it (satattva), free in all respects from
limitations, (does not admit the persistence of) ignorance anywhere. (As
such,) it bestows true liberation.
The meaning is that the essence of the reflective awareness of supreme
subjectivity (ahantā) is ‘free in all respects’ and in every way of even just a

latent trace of ‘limitations’, that is, (the many forms of) reflective awareness of

objectivity (idantā) that contract (consciousness). Thus, because it is the full
(and perfect) unfolding of insight (pārṇaprathā), it ‘(does not admit the

persistence of) ignorance anywhere’, and so bestows ‘true liberation’ʼ, which

is different from what (just) appears to be liberation. The meaning is

that

(liberated consciousness) shines as the oneness of the subject whose essence
is
the self-reflective awareness of (pure) ‘T’ (consciousness).

Now he analyses the nature of the knowledge and ignorance he has
introduced.

Concerning the Knower, Knowledge and Ignorance

īTST-TCaRT JGT JGĀĀT |

far ũīṁtzaṁrēī kravā7 1| 3ē 1
Jjñānājñānasvarūpaṁ yad uktaṁ pratyekam apy adaḥ |
dvidhā pauruṣabauddhatvabhidoktaṁ śivaśāsane || 36 ||

According to Śaiva doctrine (śivaśāsana), the knowledge and

ignorance mentioned (here) are each of two kinds, namely, spiritual

attendant cause, reason or even just an incidental cause for the execution of the

primary

cause of an effect.
“ 1 have followed Jayaratha’s explanation, reading together ‘sarvātmanojjhitam
avacchedair’. However, it seems better to read, as Gnoli does, sarvatmanā as referring

to jñānam, in which case the translation would be ‘(knowledge of the

object) in all

respects and free from limitations’. This is indeed the point Abhinava has been making
the past few verses, namely, that knowledge of that which needs be known is only fully

liberating when it is complete in all respects. The object — jñieya — literally

‘that which

needs be known’ is ultimately Śiva Himself. Complete knowledge in all respects of Śiva
is liberation itself.

TANTRĀLOKA

(pauruṣa) (which is constitutive of individual consciousness) and intellectual

(bauddha) (which is on the level of the conscious mind).

‘Śaiva doctrine (Śśivaśāsana)ī is the Supreme Lord’s teaching
(pārameśvara-darśana) in the form of the five currents (of scripture). This is

Eṣsentially, spiritual knowledge (paurusajñāna) is knowledge of the Self (puruṣa).
Conversely, spiritual ignorance is ignorance of the Self. Intellectual knowledge
(bauddhajñāna) and ignorance are the conceptual insight and lack of it that correspond

to them. Sanderson (1992: 290 n 38) refers to them as being ‘constitutive of individual
consciousness' and knowledge or ignorance ‘at the level of the conscious mind,
respectively. As we shall see, the two types of knowledge and ignorance work together.
Abhinava adopts this concept of two-fold ignorance from the Siddhānta,
developing it further. Thus, for example, the Siddhāntin Rāmakaṇṭha writes in his
commentary (vṛtti) on MPA vidyāpāda 2/2cd-3:
dvividham ajñānaṁ pauruṣaṁ bauddhaṁ ca | atra yāt pauruṣam
apratipattirūpaṁ dravyajanyaṁ tannivr̥tiḥ kāraṇanivṛttpārvikā śā rasya mukhyaṁ
prayojaṇam ucyate | adhyavasāyaphalatvād anadhigataviṣaye vijñānam upajanac
chāstraṁ buddher eva saṁskārakaṁ yuktam |

‘Ignorance is of two kinds, namely, spiritual (which is the ignorance that is
constitutive of individual consciousness) (pauraṣa), and intellectual (which is on the
level of the conscious mind) (bauddha). There (in that case), the spiritual one (which is
constitutive of individual consciousness) that is generated by the substance (which is

obscuring Impurity — mnala) is essentially the lack of the attainment (of liberated

consciousness). The main purpose of scripture is (its) cessation heralded by the
cessation of (its) cause. (Knowledge of) scripture has as its fruit (correct) apprehension,
and so, generating knowledge when an object is unknown, it is reasonable (to say that it)

refines the intellect itself (not just thought). . . .

. arabdhakāryakarmabhogoparodhato buddhyādīnāṁ dīkṣānivartyatvābhāvān na

dīkṣayā nivartayituṁ śakyaṁ bauddham anadhyavasāyātmakaṁ, tad eva śāstreṇa
nivartyata iti buddhiṣaṁskārakaṁ śāstram uktam | ṣā ca saṁskr̥tā na punaḥ
avidyāsmitārāga-dveṣābhiniveśātamabhiḥ
saṁsārahetubhūtaiḥ
kleśaiḥ puruṣam
anubadhnātīti śreyohetuḥ saṁpadyata iti |

Intellectual (ignorance), which is the lack of apprehension of the intellect and
the rest (of the components of the mind), cannot be brought to an end by initiation,
because they are obstructed by the experience (generated) by Karma that has begun to

take effect, and (that is) not what can be destroyed by initiation. That particular
(ignorance) is brought to an end by (the knowledge of) scripture. Thus, scripture is said

to be what purifies the intellect. And when that (intellect) has been purified, the
individual soul is not bound again by the impediments that are the cause of
transmigratory existence, namely, ignorance (avidyā), egoism (asmitā), attachment
(raga), aversion (dveṣa) and tenacious (clinging to mundane existence — abhiniveṣa).

Thus (the soul) attains the cause of the supreme good.”

According to the Yogasūtra, as noted in Monier-Williams’s Sanskrit

dictionary, there are five kleśas, that is, impediments to progress in Yoga. They are: 1)
ignorance (avidyā), 2) egoism (asmitā), 3) desire (rāga), 4) aversion (dveṣa), and 5)
tenacious clinging to mundane existence (abhiniveṣa).

‘“ Note that Jayaratha understands Śaivism here to be only that of these Tantras.

However, Abhinava uses the term ‘śāsana’ in a general sense. Thus, in MVV 1/192ab,


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


the meaning. That is said everywhere without distinction (in all the scriptures).

He defines that (ignorance):


T Jāī dāāī TGTGĀ TīTsvrdi] |

GuikitēaiatUEe|ētuītstz- HIEIĪ

Eilēr‘ēeezEsREtK REE7Ugūt:Ḥ.

tatra puṅṁso yad ajñānaṁ malākhyaṁ tajjam apy atha |
svapūrṇacitkriyārūpaśivatāvaraṇātmakam || 37 ||
sañṅkocidrkkriyārūpaṁ tat paśor avikalpitam |
Now, there (the innate spiritual) ignorance of the individual soul
that is called ‘Impurity’ (mala) is born from that (supreme perceiver who is

Śiva Himself), but even so it is the veil that obscures (the individual

soul’s) own Śiva-nature, which is complete (and all-embracing)
consciousness and (unobstructed) action. It is the (essentially) contracted
(state) of the knowledge and action of the fettered soul. (Inherent in the
fettered state,) it is not a product of (binding) thought constructs

(avikalpita) (as is the case with intellectual ignorance). (37-38ab)

he refers to Vaiṣṇavism and Buddhism as
‘sśāsanas’. Moreover, those who are initiated
Śaivites (śaivasaṁskṛtāḥ) are ‘people who have been properly initiated into

Parameśvaraśāsanaśāstra. Theṣe also include those who belong to the Pāśupata
Atimārga, Krama, Kula and Trika and the like. AIl of them, he says, attain the same
liberation (apavarga). The only difference is that in systems like the Krama and Trika

this is achieved quickly, whereas in the Pāśupata and Siddhānta the goal is reached
slowly ‘through a course of graded meditations in which one ascends from one reality-

level to the next, and by means of various complex rituals.' MVV 1/195-196 translation
by Sanderson (2005b: 105). Note that other forms of Śaivism, such as we find in the

Purāṇas, that do not require initiation, are not included here.
My translation follows Jayaratha’s interpretation, as it must, however this is not the
only possible meaning. The problem is the understanding of the expression ‘tajjam’
‘born from that’. Jayaratha understands ‘that’ to refer to Śiva. However, the pronoun

‘that’ (understood to be the correlate of yat) most probably refers to the ignorance which
is the Impurity of the individual soul. Moreover, what is born from that is the veil that
obscures the soul's Śiva nature. Thus another translation, that does not take into account

Jayaratha’s interpretation, would be as follows:

‘Now, there that (the innate spiritual) ignorance of the individual soul which is
called ‘Impurity (mala) is that from which is also born the veil that obscures (the
individual soul’s) own Śiva-nature, which is complete (and all-embracing)
consciousness and (unobstructed) action. (Its) form is the contracted (state) of

knowledge and action. That (ignorance is) not something conceived by the fettered

soul.”

Spiūtual ignorance (pauruṣājñāna) is not ignorance of something. It is the
fundamental impurity of the individual soul (āṇavamala) which is its state or condition

as ignorant of its own true essential Śiva nature. Although it relates to the individual

soul (puruṣa), it obscures Śiva’s real state, which is the complete and perfect knowledge
(jñāna) and total freedom of action (kriyā) that constitute his Śiva nature (Śivatā). This
happens because Siva freely chooses to replace them with the limited, imperfect

TANTRĀLOKA

knowledge (jñāna) and action (kriyā) of the individual soul when Śiva chooses to

contract down His unlimited consciousness to the limited consciousness of the
individual soul.
Although the fundamental impurity of the individual soul (āṇavamala), which

is ignorance, gives rise to the limited consciousness that generates and is grounded in

thought constructs, it is itself free of thought constructs. This ignorance does not consist
of the fettered soul’s self-conceived mistaken notions (avikalpita). Preceding the
activity of the intellect, it is the inhibited, limited self-awareness which binds the soul
which he, unthinkingly, considers to be natural to him. For him, it is as if it were the
state of consciousness free of thought constructs (nirvikapa). It is not a notion or
judgement (adhyavasāya). Spiritual ignorance, which confines the individual
consciousness to the limited perception of objects viewed in relationship to itself as the
individual perceiver, comes into play in the first moment of perception
(prathamālocana). Perception, according to the Kashmiri Śaiva teachings, takes placein

a number of stages, variously analysed. Most basically, there are two. Oneis the initial

moment of perception which is free of thought constructs. t is just the pure sensing, as
it were, of the object. It is known directly, without any intervening conception of what it

is. In the next phase, the object or objects are identified and defined as what they are
commonly known to be, for example, a table or a chair, externally, or the feeling of
pleasure or pain, inwardly. The second phase involves the development of thought
constructs that label or ‘name’ the entity perceived. In this second phase, objects are

defined by mutual exclusion from one another (‘this is a table, not anything else’) and
the perceiver. In the first phase, there is just a pure awareness of something within

consciousness, not separately defined from it or anything else. This means that it is

known according to its true nature. It is here that the fundamental Impurity, which is
ignorance of the true nature of reality, namely, omniform and transcendental
consciousness, operates. It is due to that that in the second phase we lose awareness of

the essential conscious nature of all that we perceive, and the thought constructs through
which it is identified obscure it. Thus, careful attention to perception is a major practice
of the Trika Śaiviṣm Abhinava teaches. If we can manage to attend to the first moment
of perception when we first look at something, we will feel Śiva consciousness and so
experience our true Void (i.e. empirically indefinable, unconditioned) nature, free of
duality. The Vijñānabhairava, for example, teaches several meditations that strengthen

awareness of the first moment. One is simply to gaze out at an open expanse, resting in

the pure awareness of just ‘seeing’. As is taught there: “One should cast one’s gaze on

(an open stretch of) land devoid of trees, mountains, walls and the like. When the mind
is (thus) absorbed (and dissolves away), one becomes free of the fluctuations (of
thought).” (VBh 60). Another common practice is centring. In this case one needs to
find the emptiness, free of thought constructs, of the centre between two perceptions.
The VBh teaches: “when perceiving two entities (or states), having (perceived and)
meditated (on them), rest in the centre between them. Having abandoned both

simultaneously, Reality ‘shines in the centre.’” (ibid. 61) Similarly: ‘When one thing has

been abandoned (ryakte), and consciousness has been (firmly) checked, it should not
move on to something else. Then what is beyond contemplation (atibhāvanā) blossoms
forth, by virtue of the state (free of thought) in the centre (between them)

(tanmadhyabhāvena). (ibid.

62)

Commenting on this verse from the VBh, Swami Lakshmanjoo explains that

‘the fundamental Impurity of spiritual ignorance operates here in the Void of the Centre,
contracting it down so much that it practically disappears so that all that apparently

remains is the second phase of thought construct formation which takes place in the

intellect. Thīs is the ignorance through which the Lord obscures Himself out of His own


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


The word ‘now’ is in the sense of the next (matter following on from

what has just been discussed). Thiṣ intended (sense) is that after the (initial)
enunciation (of the subject, that is, knowledge and ignorance), the occasion (has

come to state their) defining characteristics and examine (them). ‘There’, out

of the two kinds of knowledge and ignorance, (it is said that) ‘that (fundamental

Impurity) of the individual soul originated as the supreme (form of ignorance).”
The meaning (of this statement) is that (spiritual ignorance), the nature of which

has (just) been stated, (and is otherwise) called ‘Impurity (mala), is born, that

is, arisen from Śiva Himṣelf, the supreme subject who is endowed with
unlimited knowledge and action that are (unique to him, and) not in common
with any other (lower perceiver). The Supreme Lord Himself, abandoning, by

virtue of His own freedom (to do anything He chooses), (His own) full (and

complete) capacity to know and act etc., may thereby cover Himself with the
emergence of (the fundamental) impurity of the soul (āṇavamala), which is
ignorance (akhyāti). That is said (in the Paramārthasāra):

‘The Great Lord’s supreme freedom, which is (His) bringing about what
is most difficult to do, is the goddess Māyāśakti and the enveloping cover of
Siva’s own nature. Due to the grip of Māyā, the consciousness (bodha), which
is the individual soul, of one who is sullied (with the fundamental Impurity of

ignorance), is the fettered soul.”!

And as he will say:


‘Therefore, (the varied) expansion (vijrmbhita) of Impurity is only (an

expression of) the freedom (inherent in the Lord’s) own nature.

free will.’ Concerning the search for the centre, see below, comm. and notes to 1/83ab84cd (1/83cd-85ab), cf. also 1/181cd-182ab.

“’ In the course of formal argument, after the initial enunciation of a subject, its
definition and examination follow. See below 1/248ab (1/247ca) ft.

Read -yogiparapramātṛ- for -yogi parapramātṛ-.
PS 15-16ab. Of the many words for consciousness, bodha, serves to denote

consciousness as the state of ‘awakened’ (buddha) consciousness that is free of thought
constructs. According to the PTLvṛ (p.2), it is its condition ‘devoid of thought
constructs’ (avikalpatva) and ‘plenitude’ (pūṟrnatva). This is the true, essential
‘individual soul’ (puṁs). The one who is ‘sullied by Impurity’ (malin) is the individual
soul obscured by fundamental Impurity who, as such, is liable to be gripped by Māyā.

As the following line of the PS declares, when that happens, he is subject to conditioned
agency and knowledge, attachment, time, and the necessity of suffering the
consequences of his Karma. As such, he is the fettered soul (pasu). But even so, the
nucleus or essential core, as it were, is consciousness free of thought constructs, as it is

of these limitations that produce them and all else associated with their existence.

Stripped of Māyā and its consequences, the naked soul sleeps. Although always one

with Śiva, it continues to be sullied by its very condition of minuteness (aṇutva), even

without Māyā. So this consciousness, which is the individual soul, is sullied by this, the
most fundamental Impurity, which is the lack of knowledge (akhyāti) of its true
unconditioned nature, and is the prerequisite for Māyā to operate and, along with it,

Karma.
Below, 9/83cd.

TANTRĀLOKA

The fettered soul is conjoined to the three impurities, that is, the

fundamental one pertaining to the soul (āṇavamala) and the rest. The

knowledge that that perceiver possesses is the perception (ālocana) of the
manifestations (ābhāsa) (that take place) within (specific instances of) cognition

(dṛk) and action that are determined (and fixed) (niyata), because (they are)
conditioned (avacchinna) by time and space etc. It is the Supreme Lord
Himself who again conjoins to His own condition as an individual soul, which
He assumes by abandoning (His) omniscience and the rest, the capacity for
limited action (kalā) etc., by virtue of which he (as the individual soul)
possesses a limited power to know and act.™' That is said (in the following
passage in the Mālinīvijayottara);
That (power of Māyā) generated the principle which is the Force (of

limited agency) (kalātattva), due to union with which the individual soul has

come to possess the capacity (to be an) agent. Then (that Force) emitted (the
principles of the capacity for) Knowledge (vidyā) and Attachment (rāga). (This)

knowledge discerns the action (karman) of that (individual soul), its effect and
instrument (of its activity).” Attachment (rāga) also makes him take pleasure
(and be attached) to his own worldly pleasures, even if they are impure. (Next)

Necessity (niyati) conjoins the individual soul to (the fruits of) his own action
(karman). (Finally) Time, which is determined (by units) beginning with a

moment (tuti), also measures out (and conditions) (kalayati) him.

(As here,) so too in the initial enunciation (of the subject at hand),

which is the nature of knowledge, the nature of ignorance was described first in

order to establish what must be eliminated.

Literally ‘avacchinna’ means ‘divided upʼ or ‘cut off.

Read with MS T: niyatajñatva- for niyataṁ jñatva-. The one eternal, omniscient and

omnipotent consciousness, which is completely independent and requires nothing,

initially, out of its own free will, empties itself of all its attributes to become the

contracted individual consciousness which, the very opposite of the original fully
expanded consciousness, is the individual soul devoid of all the former's powers and

attributes. Then, again out of its own freedom, it infuses into the soul a limited power to
act and know, and so it becomes a limited agent and perceiver. To this are added
attachment, time and the constraints of the law of Karma. See below, note 1,454.
MVT 1/27-29. The sequence in which these five obscuring coverings (kañcuka) are

generated from Maāyā is not uniform in all the sources. For a detailed discussion, see
below, 9/167cd-213.

“ MSs K, Ch, J, h, N, T and D read punah for pumān.
“ MV 1/28ab is also quoted in TĀv ad 9/192cd-193. The translation of this line follows
Abhinava’s implicit explanation of it in TĀ 9/192cd-193. Another possible translation

could be: ‘(This limited) knowledge discerns the action (karman) of that (individual
soul), so that (it may act) as the cause (that accomplishes) the effect (which is the aim
of) that (individual soul) (kārya).”
“É A “tuṭi’ is an eighth of a second. As in this case, the word may also denote

generically a very small span of time.

MV 1/29cd is paraphrased as TĀ 9/201cd and quoted in TĀy ad 9/201cd-202ab. MV
1/27abc is quoted in TĀv ad 9/174 and ad 9/189cd-190ab. MV 1/27-29 is quoted ad

1/37-38ab and MV 1/27a ad 9/40cd-41ab.

Read with all the MSs: ucchedyatva- for avaśyocchedyatva-


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Surely (one may ask,) it is said that the knowledge of the individual soul
(in the sense of its capacity to know), which is essentially an activity of the

intellect, is devoid of thought constructs. (Well then,) how is it that it is not
(considered to) occur (within) a part (aṁśa) of the intellect? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

tad ajñānaṁ na buddhyaṁśo ‘dhyavasāyādyabhāvataḥ || 38 II

That (spiritual) ignorance is not a part of the intellect because (it

does not entail a specific determinate) ascertainment (adhyavasāya) (of
something) and the rest (of the cogitation associated with that
ascertainment). (38cd)

In this way also, according to, for example, the dictum: ‘the intellect is
(conceptual) ascertainment (adhyavasāya)’, the primary nature of the intellect
is ascertainment. If that is absent, how can (spiritual ignorance) possess the
(same) nature (dharma) as that (intellect)? Thus he says (what follows).

Definitions of the Forms of Knowledge and Ignorance

TāṀŪhsraīvaāṁtdtēriāāī a] || 38 1|

| o||

aham ittham idaṁ vedmīty evam adhyavasāyinī |

satkañcukābilāṇūtthapratibimbanato yadā |l| 39 ||

dhīr jāyate tadā tādṛgjñānam ajñānaśabditam |

‘°l The limited capacity of the soul to know is essentially its ignorance because, as we

have seen, ignorance is here considered to be a limited form of knowledge. Moreover, it

is not in itself a thought construct, although, operating through the intellect, it generates
them. The question here then is why should this limited capacity to know not be an
attribute of the intellect and so be an aspect of it? If it is, then this aspect of the intellect
would be free of thought constructs.

saṁKā 23a. The yuktidīpikā provides a definition of the term adhyavasāya:

8aurevāyaṁ .puruṣa evāyam iti yaḥ pratyayo niścayo ‘arthagrahaṇaṁ s0
‘adhyavasāyaḥ. ‘The perception (pratyaya), that is, assessment (niścaya), which is the
act of knowing an object, (of the sort) ‘this is indeed a cow’ and ‘this is indeed a man’
(and not anything else), is ascertainment.” The ‘ascertainment’ (adhyavasāya) of the

empirical nature of things is conceptual, and is the specific function of the intellect
which marks the culmination of sensorial cognition, whether it be of an outer or an inner
imagined object. The latter can be recollected from the past or newly formed. Again, the

knowledge that 2 + 2 = 4 is also an intellectual, conceptual ascertainment. It is a result

of the intelligence (pratibhā) the intellect possesses by virtue of the reflection of

consciousness within it.

TANTRĀLOKA

bauddhaṁ tasya ca tat pauṁsnaṁ poṣaṇīyaṁ ca postr ca || 40 |I
If the notion (dhī) that ascertains (adhyavāsayanī) (the nature of an

entity as) “I know this (to be) thus” arises, (generated) from the reflection

(of the light of the Self) in the (mirror of the intellect) of the individual soul
(anu) who is sullied by the six obscuring coverings (kañcuka), (but does
not develop further,) then that kind of (intellectual) knowledge is said to be

ignorance. Its (underlying corresponding spiritual ignorance,) which is that

of the individual soul (itself), is nourished by it, and (the spiritual ignorance
nourished by it in its turn) nourishes it (intellectual ignorance). (Thus,

spiritual and intellectual ignorance feed on one another). (39-40)

(The existence of the group of) ‘six obscuring coverings’ is the reason
why (the intellect) is capable of ascertaining in this way (the nature of an entity
perceived through the senses). The six obscuring coverings are described (in the
following way in the Paramārthasāra):

‘ See below, 1/215 and 9/238.

The six obscuring coverings (kañcuka) that envelop the individual fettered soul are,
in the order accepted by Abhinavagupta, beginning with the one closest to the individual

soul: 1) Māyā, 2) the limited power of action (kalā) (also called the Force (of limited
agency)), from which are generated 3) the limited power of knowledge (vidyā),
4) Attachment (rāga), 5) Necessity (niyati) (which is essentially the law of Karma and
causality), and 6) Time (kāla) (see below, 9/204). 1) Māyā is the first covering which

obscures consciousness, of which the others are aspects derived from it. Māyā limits

consciousness universally, infusing into it a sense of duality, difference, ignorance,

illusion and conflict. Initially, it removes all the power and awareness of consciousness,

plunging it, as it were, into a state of deep sleep. Subsequently, it revives it into the

limited condition of the individual soul by generating the following five coverings.
2) The first of these is called ‘kalā’ which is the limited power of action or agency the
individual soul possesses. The word ‘kalā’ means energy or power, but not complete

power, just a part (kalā). Thīs limited power is infused into the fettered soul, allowing it

to act to a limited extent. However, its limited actions, although possible because it
possesses some degree of freedom, are binding. Accordingly, I sometimes call it the

Force (of limited agency) (kalā). The remaining four coverings are derived from it (see
below, 9/203). 3) Just as the infusion of the power of limited action makes the soul a

limited agent, the power of limited knowledge makes it a limited knower. Although the
soul is essentially consciousness, as is Śiva Himself, its knowledge is limited. The soul
which is initially so contracted that it has no capacity to know anything, is given some
power to do so by this obscuring covering, which thus illumines it in a limited way even

as it obscures the inherent omniscience of the soul’s innate conscious nature. 4) The
next covering is called ‘rāga’, which means ‘attachment’. It is the craving and
atṭachment the fettered soul feels for particular things, accompanied by the fear of losing
them. 5) Necessity (niyati) is the principle of constraint (which is the literal meaning of
the word) that ensures that specific karmic causes give rise to their consequences. It is

due to this that the individual soul (or indeed any entity) is ‘fixed’ and ‘constrained’ to
its own specific, limited nature so that only specific causes give rise to their respective

effects. One may equate it with Natural Law. 6) Finally, time is the sense of the passage

of time to which the individual soul feels itself to be subject and formats its experience

in temporal terms. See below 9/167cd-213 for a detailed exposition of these six
principles.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

‘(The individual soul) is bound because it is under the sway of the

power of time, (its) limited capacity to act (kalā), and the necessity (of having to
bear the consequence of Karma) (niyati), (as well as) attachment and the limited

capacity to know (vidyā). (The result is perceptions of the sort,) “‘just now 1

know something and I know just this very thing only incompletely." The
inner aspect (antaraṅga) of the individual soul is said to be this, namely, the six

obscuring coverings, along with Māyā.

The ‘individual soulʼ, which is the limited Self, is ‘sullied’ by (the
obscuring coverings,) the nature of which have just been described, and is as if
withered away (mlāna) by the emergence (within its contracted consciousness)
of (its) fixed (pratiniyata), (limited) capacity to know and act etc. (An
intellectual notion is generated) ‘from the reflection (of the light of the Self),
that is, from the projection of the shade of consciousness that is born from that

(individual soul). This is the meaning. Such is the nature of (the intellect,)

because in this way, it is the plane of the manifestation of the consciousness of

the individual soul. This is the overall sense. ‘That kind (of intellectual

knowledge) is the ascertainment (adhyavasāya) (of the nature of things) in this
way. In order to explain that they are mutually (both) the cause and the effect
(of one another), he says, ‘its (underlying corresponding spiritual

ignorance)ʼ etc. ‘Its’ (means) that (ignorance which is) of the intellect, and

‘that of the individual soul’ is the (ignorance) which is (intrinsic) to the

indiviḍual soul as its condition, that is, pertaining to the individual soul. This is

the meaning. ‘It is nourished by it’. The meaning is that (this is) the effect.

(Take for example,) one who is penetrated by lust, grief and the like, the
conceptual knowledge (vikalpakaṁ jñānam) that arises (in his mind) consists of

the direct experience" of this and that entity induced by reflection

(anusaṁdhāna) etc. on (his sense of) identification with that (emotion). As

they say:

‘Those who are overwhelmed by lust, grief, fear, madness, (the fear of)
a thief, (bad) dreams and the like, see things as if present before them even

though they do not exist.”

Read with MSs J, Jh, TṬ and the printed edition of the PS -niyativaśād instead of
niyatibalād and emend rāgāvidyāvaśena to rāgavidyāvaśena.

Read asarvātmanaiva for sarvātmanaiva.
“ PS 16cd-17. PS 17ab is quoted below ad 11/14cd-18. PS 17cd is quoted ad 9/204, see
note there for a translation of Yogarāja’s commentary on the entire verse.

Read -sākṣātkārātmakavikalḷpakaṇṁ for —sākṣāṭkārāṭmakam avikalpakaṁ.

“’ This example ilustrates well how the two kinds of ignorance reinforce each other. A

person in love forms images of the beloved in his mind, which then further intensify his
emotions. The images are thought constructs produced by the activity of the intellect.

The emotion is a state of consciousness experienced within consciousness as such, with

no intervening thought constructs. But although fundamentally different in this respect,

they reinforce one another.

TANTRĀLOKA

(The one that) ‘nourishesʼ is the cause (kāraṇa). The instrumental

cause (nimitta) of dreams and the like is the preceding experience. One who

lives (blissfully) on Banana Island does not have even the (slightest) desire to

imagine fire (or anything else he has not seen that may be harmful).
Having described ignorance in this way, he says (the following) to
describe the two kinds of knowledge also.

aṃīī ŪJṬHT JT: IHTZĀTTḤ|

1 1
[kezzEEezzick ēitzrEEiEE ḤI

ũŪīz = || 2 I|

kṣīṇe tu paśusaṁskāre puṁsaḥ prāptaparasthiteḥ |

vikasvaraṁ tad vijñānaṁ pauruṣaṁ nirvikalpakam || 41

vikasvarāvikalpātmajñānaucityena yāvasā |
tad bauddáhaṁ yasya tat pauṁsnaṁ prāgvat poṣyaṁ ca poṣṭṛ ca || 42 |

Spiritual knowledge is the expanding consciousness (vijñāna) devoid

of thought constructs of the individual soul who has attained (its original)
supreme state, as the latent trace (saṁskāra) of his (lower) fettered state
wanes away. The (liberating) insight (avasā) (that develops) in accord with

(the plenitude of) this expanding knowledge of the Self, free of thought

constructs, is intellectual knowledge (on the level of the conscious mind), of

which spiritual (knowledge) is, as before, (both) nourished (by it) and

nourishes (it). (Thus, spiritual and intellectual knowledge nourish one
another). (41-42)

‘Spiritual knowledge’ is ‘devoid of thought constructsʼ, that is, it is

different in character from thought constructs such as that of the artificial

(constructed) (kṛtrima) ego (which is just a notion of self) and the like. (On

the contrary,) it is ‘expanding (consciousness)ʼ, that is, the reflective awareness
of supreme ‘I’ consciousness of ‘the individual soul’ of which all bondage has
ceased, and so has attained oneness with supreme consciousness by the
destruction of (the impurities of) Karma and Māyā, in accord with the rule that
The ego is the sense of oneself as being the agent of one’s own action and the
perceiver of one’s own perceptions. t is of two kinds, according to whether the sense of
self is that of the one universal and transcendental Śiva consciousness or of the
individual fettered soul. The former is the result of the innate reflective awareness of

consciousness, which is its inherent power. Thus, it is ‘uncreated’ (akṛtrima). The latter
is the ego which arrogates to itself the operation of the senses and mind, which

processes their input and responds to it through the organs of action of the body. It is

generated from Nature (which is generated from Māyā) along with the other priṇciples

that operate and manifest in the sphere of objectivity. It is a notion of the Self that is

thus ‘created’ and ‘artificial’ (both meanings of the word ‘kṛtrima’
). Ultimately, it is a
‘conceived’ (kalpita), contracted, limited and indiyidual notion of Self which is created
(krt) by the ‘uncreated' ‘U — ‘aham’ — which is free of thought constructs, as a mistaken

conception of it.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘when the instrumental cause (nimitta) is absent, so too is that which is the

occasion for its application (naimittika)’. (This is implied) by saying that just
the latent trace of (his lower) ‘fettered state’, that is, the (Impurity) pertaining
to the individual soul (āṇava), has waned away. This is the meaning.

‘(The (liiberating) insight (develops)) in accord’ with the completely

full (and perfect) nature (of Śiva Himself) who possesses it. Thus the nature of
this (liberating insight) is: ‘all this glorious outpouring (vibhava) is mine’. ‘Of
lIn other words, in the absence of the cause, its effect cannot arise. The destruction of
the Impurities marks that of bondage, which is their effect and the reason of their
existence.
“ The basic or fundamental Impurity is āṅava mala, which is intrinsic to the individual
soul — aṇu. It is the ignorance which makes him that, and so is called ‘āṇava’, that is,

‘pertaining to the soul’. Once the latent trace of that is removed from consciousness, the

other two forms of Impurity which develop from it, and are aspects of it, namely, Karma

and Māyā, also cease. When this happens, individual consciousness is free of constraints

and so spontaneously expands back to its original unconditioned, universal expanse. The
knowledge of reality, in all its aspects, namely, Śiva, consciousness, the Self and the

Being of all things, unfolds in consonance with this expansion.
One could also think of this ‘latent trace’ of limitation as a kind of habit.
Without making any effort to develop and maintain awareness of one’s own essentially
conscious, spiritual nature, it naturally, that is, effortlessly and spontaneously, tends to
contract. This contraction amounts to the mistaken identification of oneself with the
body, senses and mind. By personal effort and, ultimately, grace, this mistaken
identification weakens as one’s attention is progressively more centred on the

fundamental subjective, divine consciousness. But however much progress one may

have made on this path of spiritual knowledge, until the last latent trace of ignorance,
that is, habit of identifying oneself with the body, has ceased, it is liable to form again.
Thus it is only when it ceases completely that the expanded, liberated state can be

permanent and individual consciousness is established in its true universal nature, which
is free of these limited, binding thought constructs from which the individual, limited
subject is formed. In other words, it is a mental creation (kalpita). The true, unlimited
subject, which emerges when it ceases, is free of thought constructs and is thus
‘uncreated’ (akalpita) and authentic. This is the intellectual knowledge (bauddhajñāna)
of the individual soul who is thus filled with the spiritual knowledge (pauruṣajñāna)
that expanded consciousness has of its own nature. In this way they sustain and nourish
one another.
ĪP 4/12a. Also quoted below in TĀv ad 4/169-170, 5/129cd-131ab (128cd-130ab)
(the whole verse), 7/64cd-75ab and 14/46. The entire verse says: ‘“He whose nature is all

things, knowing that ‘all this glorious outpouring (vibhava) is mine’ possesses Maheśa’s

state even when (his) thought constructs are flowing.’ It is quoted below ad 5/129cd131ab (128cd-130ab). Utpaladeva comments in his vrtri on this line:
‘Although the embodied perceiver (kṣetrajña) continues to produce thought
constructs by the Lord’s power itself, even in that state (daśā), having known fully that
(his own) nature is that of the Lord, penetrating the universe as one with it (by reflecting
that) ‘this glorious outpouring consisting of transmigratory existence is mine’,

transforming all (his) thought constructs without exception into nothing but reflective
awareness alone, possesses Maheśvara’s state.


Abhinava comments in his vimarsinī:


‘That inner Self (pratyagātmā) (within the body), who is the fettered soul, is

not something other than this ‘I’. Rather He Himself, who is the supreme being, the one
compact mass of the Light (of consciousness) that has totally encompassed (the

TANTRĀLOKA

whichʼ intellectual knowledge is ‘as beforeʼ, that is, just as the two forms of
ignorance are mutually nourished and nourishing, so too (are the two forms of
knowledge). This is the meaning. Similarly, one should understand (by

implication) that the difference (viśeya) (between them is that knowledge is)
complete (knowledge) and (ignorance is) incomplete (knowledge). Otherwise,

the nature of knowledge and ignorance could not be stated (at all).

Surely, (one may ask,) this kind of absence of knowledge has no
beginning. There is no disagreement about this. But when could this knowledge
which is the non-existence of that (ignorance) arise? And what is the attendant

cause (nimitta) of its absence? With this doubt in mind, he says:

āaĩlP̄]Ṃ T-TT TT #SST TRḺT |I 3 I
tatra dĩkṣādinã pauṁsnam ajñānaṁ dhvaṁsi yady api |

tathāpi taccharīrānte taj jīñānaṁ vyajyate sphuṭam || 43 |

“““°There (in that context) although spiritual ignorance (constitutive

of individual consciousness) is destroyed by initiation and the rest (that
follows), even so (without spiritual knowledge), that knowledge (of the Self)
manifests explicitly (only) when the body comes to an end.
Spiritual ignorance, the nature of which has (just) been described, is

destroyed by initiation, which is said to be (as follows).

individual) subject and object, is (who) I am. He is me not something else at all. Thus
the creation of thought constructs is also the ‘glorious outpouring’ (vibhava), the
characteristic of which is the freedom (svātantrya), that is ‘mine’. When this kind of
reflective awareness has become firm in this way, even one whose thought constructs

have not ceased is liberated even whilst alive. As is said: “Even doubt would not make

one doubt (one’s own true nature); this (reality) is clearly a state free of doubts.”
In the previous verse Utpaladeva explained how the fettered soul comes to
recognise his true Śiva nature by the gradual attenuation of thought constructs; this one
explains how this recognition is achieved even when they continue to form, if they are

like this.
“It would be impossible to talk about knowledge or ignorance at all if ignorance were
to be a total absence of knowledge. No understanding of being ignorant could ever arise.

Moreover, if spiritual and intellectual knowledge and ignorance were to be totally
different, they could not affect one another. They could not contribute to each other's

development. The difference between the two types of ignorance and knowledge, like
that between ignorance and knowledge itself, is not in their essential nature, rather it lies
in their locus and the degree and form of their development.

“ Abhinava now refers to a fundamental example of how these two forms of
knowledge work together, that is, initiation. Initiation alone can only liberate the soul
after death. This is so because although the initiate has attained spiritual knowledge

thereby, he is still without intellectual knowledge. If, after receiving initiation, which

allows him access to the scriptures and the teachings, he cultivates this other type of

knowledge, he may achieve liberation in his own lifetime. In this way, the two work

together.
Read with all the MSs except Kh and G tu śarīrānte for tac charīrānte.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘It bestows (dīyate) the essence of knowledge, and the latent traces of
the fettered state are destroyed (kṣīyante); thus endowed with (the capacity of)
‘bestowing’ (dāna) (knowledge) and the ‘destruction’ (kṣapaṇa) (of the fettered

state), it is called ‘initiation’ (dīkṣā).”

‘Even so’, that is, if ‘that’ knowledge of the Self, which is (essentially)
just the absence of ignorance, is propense to manifest (by taking initiation),
however, as the saying goes: ‘only (the Karma) that has begun (to take effect)

(prārabdha) should not be purified’ (in the course of initiation). Thus the

Kṣemarāja quotes the same verse in his commentary on SYT 5/88cd. There, instead

of the plural kṣīyante [t: kṣīyate] paśuvāsanāḥ -- ‘the latent traces of the fettered state
are destroyedʼ, we find the singular — kṣīyate paśuvāsanā — ‘the latent trace of the
fettered state is destroyedʼ.


Cf. Ūrmikaulārṇavatantra:


dīyate jñānasadbhāvaṁ [-va] kṣīyate pāśapaījaram |
dīnakṣapaṇaśīlavāt [-kṣīlatvāṭ] dīkṣeyaṁ pārameśvarī | 2/290 ||
‘It gives (dīyate) the essence of knowledge and the cage of the fetters is

destroyed; ‘giving’ (dāna) and ‘destroying’ (kṣapaṇa); it is, therefore, this, the initiation
(dīkṣā) of the Supreme Goddess.”


Virtually the same verse is found in the MBT:

dīyate jñānasadbhāvaṁ kṣīyate pāśapañjaram |
dīnakṣapaṇadharmitvāt dīkṣā teneha kīrtitā || KuKh 31/4
Similar definitions of initiation are found in virtually all the manuals and

Āgamas of the Śiddhānta, and indeed in Tantras of all schools. Most of these definitions

are in the form of didactic etymologies of the roots dā ‘to give’ and kṣa ʻto destroyʼ.

Abhinavagupta also ṣays that these are the defining characteristics of initiation

(dānakṣapaṇalakṣaṇā dīkṣā PTy p. 14). Similarly, Kṣemarāja defines initiation as ‘the
destruction of the fetters and the bestowal of Śiva’s plane (comm. SVT I p. 13). Brunner
has collected examples of such definitions from the Siddhānta Āgamas (see SŚP ĪI p. 34). Four out of five of them agree with our text that what is given (diyate) by initiation is

the essence of knowledge. Similarly, what is destroyed is bondage. This is variously

described as the ‘cage of sin’ (Suprabheda, caryāpāda, 4/1cd), the three impurities
(Cintya, T. 14, p. 338, AVS, T. 7, p. 77), the latent trace of karma (Mṛgendra,
kriyāpāda, 8, comm. on the first verse) and that of the fetters (comm. SVT 5/88a). It thus
purifies the Self (Mṛgendra ibid.) and bestows knowledge (AVS ibid.). Abhinavagupta

quotes a similar verse from the Siddhāntāgamas which says: ‘Initiation is said to possess

the attributes of giving and destroying. It gives the essence of knowledge and destroys
all impurity by piercing (the soul) with awakened consciousness (hodhānuvedha)ī (PTv

p. 14).

Sanderson (1992: 287) comments: ‘According to the semantic analysis

(nirvacanam) traditional to the Saiva literature the word dīkṣā (‘initiation’) is
appropriate to the rite (anvartha-) because it means ‘that which bestows (dā)

knowledge and destroys (kṣi) the fetters. But the bestowing of knowledge

(jñānadānam), which is said to account for the first syllable of the word is not the
imparting of conscious knowledge or enlightenment (bauddhaṁ jñānam), because such

TANTRĀLOKA

impurity of Karma, which brings about the existence (and continuing life of)
this body, persists. It is for this reason (that liberating knowledge) ‘manifests
explicitly (only) when’ the present ‘body comes to an end’, in accord with the
teaching that: ‘one attains Śiva when the body dies (dehapāta). The meaning

is that it manifests because it is experienced directly (only after death). By the
expression (initiation) ‘and the rest (that follows)’, one should understand the

remaining mode of conduct (that should be observed after initiation until death)
(Śeṣavrtti), not the middling-intense (tīvratara) descent of the power (of grace)

or the like. (The latter) is the attendant cause (nimitta) of initiation, and so

reference to it is established by the word (initiation) itself. Nor is there any
other attendant cause of liberation apart from initiation in this (case). That is
said (in the following verse):

knowledge would surely transform the individual beyond recognition. The knowledge

claimed is one that is said to have been received on a deeper, subconscious level within

the individual (pauruṣaṁ jñānam), where it can lie latent until the moment of death
when the remnant of the fetters that has obscured it disappears and the Śiva state (śivatā,
Śivāvasthā) becomes manifest.”

“Read prārabdhekaṁṅ for prārabdhrekaṁ SNT 4/141d. The Karma that has begun to
take effect is responsible for the continuing experience of day-to-day life. Thus, if that is
also ‘purifiedʼ, i.e.

removed in the course of initiation, it would entail the death of the

initiate. Cf. above, note 1,363 and below, 9/130cd-131ab, and 15/27.

’ MV. 1/454, below 13/203 and note.

! Here it seems that Jayaratha is refuting the view of some other commentator on the

Tantrāloka. We are told a little further ahead that the most intense descent of the power

of grace is immediately liberating. This may be because it is so intense that the recipient
dies from it (see below, 13/130cd-131ab), but if he survives, he is liberated in the body.

Other less intense forms liberate after death which comes about from natural causes.

This is the reason for the reference here to the middling-intense form of grace ‘or the

likeʼ, i.e. other lower levels of grace. The Kaula traditions, as one of the corollaries of
their claim to being nondualist (advaya), is the claim that their higher traditions can
bestow liberation in this life. In other words, they claim that their teachers can serve as
vehicles for the most intense forms of Śiva's grace that can bestow immediate liberation.

’ The expression dīkṣādi — Śinitiation and the rest refers to at least two different,

although related things. It seems that a previous commentator understood the ‘rest’ to be
a reference to the grace required to make the initiation effective. But Jayaratha

disagrees. Grace is essential for initiation to be successful. Without it, there would be no

initiation and so, Jayaratha maintains, reference to it is implicit in the word ‘initiation’

itself. Initiation is itself the liberating grace. Moreover, he adds, there is no other
attendant cause of liberation apart from initiation. So by ‘the rest’, he says, is meant all

else that needs to be done apart from the actual initiation itself, which marks and

essentially is the descent of Siva’s power of grace. This is the ‘remaining mode of
conduct’ (śeṣavrtti. Initiation has fully purified the initiand. By means of the rite,
through Śiva’s grace, the initiate has actually been conjoined to Śiva. According to the

Siddhānta view, he is as free as is possible while one is still in this world living in the

body. What remains to be done is for him to maintain his state of purity and hence
union, until death, after which he is fully liberated.

‘’ Grace and initiation are attendant or instrumental causes of liberation, the former
leading to the latter. Knowledge alone is the direct cause.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘Initiation alone frees from that extensive bondage which obstructs
(entry into) the supreme plane (sthāna) and so too leads upwards to Śiva’s

Again, initiation may take place by the first (and most excellent) process
(of realisation), namely No Means (anupāyādikrama), which is heralded by the
most intense (tvratama) descent of the power (of grace) by virtue of which one

(attains) liberation at that very moment. That is said (in the following line):

‘Thus some (fortunate one) is liberated due to that conjunction (saṁbandha)
(with Śiva’s power) at that very moment.”" (Some may say that) this attendant
cause (nimitta) of liberation does not depend on initiation. (But) that is (an

impossible view that) should not be entertained, because in that way there
would be a conflict (of views) with the scriptures (śruti).’ (However, it is said

that):

‘It is well established in all the scriptures that right (liberating)

knowledge (arises) for one (who is fit for it) as a result of one’s own purification

(by the deity directly) (ārmasaṁskāra), without (having to take) initiation.’

(However,) what is intended by the prohibition (of initiation in
statements) such as this is with reference to initiation (imparted
means of
outer (ritual) action. Otherwise, how could one make this (prohibition) square

with the sense of the expression here ‘purification of the Self’'?" Now enough

of much (talk).

‘’ Quoted by Kṣemarāja in his comm. on SYT 11/199. Ultimately of course, it is not the

initiation itself that does this. Only Śiva can liberate the soul (see below, 13/122-125ab).
Thus, liberation is accessible to everybody because it is accomplished for them rather
than by them (Sanderson 2006: 25).

’ Initiation (dīkṣā) is of various kinds and levels according to the degree of the descent

of the power (of grace) that the initiand receives. At the highest, No Means (anupāya)
level, he receives the most intense descent of the power of grace (tīvratīvraśaktipāta).
When this happens, the bodily functions are suspended and pure consciousness realizes
its own Self as a dense mass of uninterrupted Light and Bliss which is the essence of
pure [-ness, that is, the supreme subjectivity of Śiva Himself. See below, 13/129-310 for
an extensive discussion of all the forms of the descent of the power of grace. No Means
(anupāya) is the subject of chapter two.
1 MVT 1/43ab. The whole passage (ibid. 1/42-43ab) is quoted below in 13/199cd-200;
see also below, 21/4, which says: ‘at a certain time, the peaceful power of Śiva that

beṣtows liberation is conjoined with an individual soul because it is fit (to receive it).

Thus some (fortunate one) is liberated due to that conjunction (saṁbandha) at that very

moment.

Note that Jayaratha is referring to the Tantras as śruti, a term normally reserved for

the Vedic revelation. See above note 1,307.
“’ One could also translate: ‘by the purification of the Selṝ’. MS Kh reads:

saṁskāraparipākata(h) — ‘as a result of the maturing of the purification of the Self’

‘’ The point Jayaratha is making is that initiation is necessary. It is true that in some

rare cases discussed below in chapter two, which deals with No Means (anupāya) (e.g
TĀ 2/2) and elsewhere, the disciple is liberated directly by Śiva’s grace mediated by a

liberating look or touch of the teacher. However, this possibility should not be
understood to be an exception. Rather it is itself a form of initiation, although it does not

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely, (one may ask.) if liberation (is attained) only after death in this
way by initiation, then how is it that it is said that ‘one is liberated even whilst

alive’?
" With this doubt in mind, he says:

feraī ṁa sta-Ṁtk:
ēka fērT ú| xzI
bauddhajñānena tu yadā bauddham ajñānajṛmbhitam |
vilīyate tadā jīvanmuktiḥ karatale ṣṭhitā || 44 ||

(However), liberation whilst still alive (in the body) is (as if) in the

palm of one’s hand, if (all that has) developed out of intellectual ignorance
(on the level of the conscious mind) dissolves away by (sound) intellectual

knowledge (which is the self-realisation that results through insight into the

ultimate purport of the scriptures).

(Liberation whilst still alive is possible) ‘by (sound) intellectual
knowledgeʼ, that is, (by the knowledge) that arises by listening etc. to the

involve any outer rites. The verse Jayaratha quotes here represents a view which

apparently denies the need for initiaton. But, as Jayaratha points out, there is no

disagreement that liberation requires that the soul be purified, and it is this, above all,

which is the hallmark of initiation. The word ‘initiation’ in this case denotes the rite of

initiation. What is meant is not that there is no need of initiation as such, only that it
need not be in the form of an outer rite. Initiation is essentially a process whereby the
impurities of the individual Self are purified, and he is thereby empowered. Jayaratha
agrees that in some cases this may take place without any external rite, but this does not

mean that liberation is possible without initiation. If the Self has been purified, which is
essential in order to attain the liberating knowledge of the Self, then initiation must have

taken place, although not necessarily externally. This possibility is what Abhinavagupta

discusses indirectly in the following verses. See below, notes to 4/49-50 and 60cd-62ab.
See below, 3/272ab (3/271) and 13/184cd, cf. also 1 1/103
Even if initiaton has been received and the initiate is thereby freed of spiritual
ignorance, the spiitual knowledge that results is not conceptual and so is unclear. It sṭill
needs to be understood. Moreover, it cannot function completely because of the

continuing identification with the body which makes it possible, indeed, very likely that

it begins to accumulate again. Insight into the true nature of reality and one’s own Self

is essential. And this can only be achieved by Lord Śiva’s grace through a deepening
understanding of the scriptures, the teacher’s words and personal insight. This
ultimately leads to realisation of the one supreme nondual reality of Śiva consciousness,
even when the body, senses and mind are operating.
Initiation purifies the initiand and conjoins him with Śiva to which it gives rise.
By maintaining the ritual program to which the initiate has access, he maintains that
purity, and so once the Karma that is in the course of completion is exhausted and the
body drops, he achieves liberation. To get it in this life he needs the liberating insight

which is the realisation of his identity with Śiva. In other words, the state of unity

atṭained by initiation has to become a direct experience for it to be immediately

liberating.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Supreme Lord's nondual scriptures. That is said (in the following verse
from
the Kularatṇamāḻā);
‘If the teacher expounds the tradition (at the right) time, (the disciple) is
liberated (in an instant); from that moment on all that remains is just
the

machine (of his body).

And one should know that that (takes place) by virtue of the

competence (adhikāra) (to receive the teaching in this way conferred upon him)

by initiation. One who has not taken initiation does not have the competence

to even listen to the scriptures. So even if its instrumental cause (nimitta

) is the

understanding (avabodha) (of the scriptures), how could that (liberating)

knowledge arise? 1t is said that: ‘one should not utter (the teachings of) Śiva’s

path (paddhati) in front of those who have not been initiated. The point

(uktaprāya) is that by (doing) this nothing happens at all (ua kiñcid bhavati) for
one whose spiritual ignorance has not been destroyed. Those who see things
otherwise (and think that initiation is unnecessary would anyway) not be
propense to taking initiation because there would not be anybody (amongs
t
them able to) perceive (draṣṭr) the goal to be attained. Thuṣ, as (initiation) is

the root cause of the attainment of liberation, one should not say that (the rule
regarding the necessity of) initiation is lax. Although spiritual knowledge

is

Jayaratha is referring here to the classic formulation by Advaita Vedānta and others

of how the study of scripture can lead to liberation by insight into its true meaning.
The
first step is to ‘hear’ (or read it) carefully. This is called ‘liṣṭeṉingʼ (śravaṇa). The
next
step is to carefully reflect on its meaning. This is called ‘cogitation’ (manana)
. This
cogitation leads to a profound contemplation (nidhidhyāsa) of the reality
the scriptures
teach, resulting in a direct experience of it. This practice was originally applied
to the
study of the Upaniṣads, particularly its Great Sayings (mahāvākya). Theṣe include
‘all
this indeed is the Brahman’ (sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma), ‘this
Brahman is
consciousness’ (prājño ‘yaṁ brahma), and the most famous of all: ‘thou
are thatʼ (tat

tvam asi). Studying and reflecting on the scriptures in this way, one develops

true

insight, which is an increasingly direct experience of the Reality they
teach. This is what
is meant by ‘intellectual knowledge’ here. It is ‘intellectual’ not because it
is ‘cleverʼ or

academic. It is called ‘intellectual’ because it is the knowledge which is the light
of
consciousness that shines reflected in the intellect, and is known in and through the

profound reflection on its true nature which articulates itself as such statement
s and the
entire teachings.

“ Below in 13/230-231ab, Abhinava quotes a similar verse, stating that this is the view

of both the Ratṇamālātantra and the Gāmatantra. Thus, a doubt may arise as to
which
one of these two Jayaratha is quoting from. It cannot be the Gamatant
ra, because

Jayaratha never quotes from the Gamatantra and so most probably did not have access

to it, whereas, on the contrary he does cite the Kularatnamālā in several places.
Thus,
we may conclude that the Abhinava is quoting from the Gamatantra there
and Jayaratha

from the Ratnamālā here. For further details see note to 13/230-231ab.
“ Read with MSs K, J, JH, N, T. and D: dīkṣādhikāreṇaiva for dīkṣitādhikāreṇaiva.
SVṬ 5/51ab.
‘ Read draṣṭur for sraṣṭur. The goal the scriptures teach cannot be known and hence

attained without being free of spiritual impurity. If none believed that this
is true and
saw the matter differently, thinking that intellectual knowledge is enough, nobody
could
correctly perceive the goal and hence wish to take initiation, which is the means
to attain
the necessary state of purity.

TANTRĀLOKA

propense to becoming manifest by means of initiation and the like, it does not
beṣtow liberation just then, because as is said (in the scriptures) it manifests
after the death of the body. (However,) this (liberating intellectual knowledge

manifests) at that very moment (in which it is received). Thus, it is accepted
(kaṭākṣita) (in this way) that (out of the two kinds of knowledge,) it is the main
(and predominant) one.
It is not only because of this that it is the main attendant cause (nimitta)
of that (form of liberation). There is another (reason) also. Thus, he says:

cá ītraē |

āTT |I II
dīkṣāpi bauddhavijñānapūrvā satyaṁ vimocikā |
tena tatrāpi bauddhasya jñānasyāsti pradhānatā || 45 ||

Jayaratha is referring indirectly to a cardinal point of doctrine regarding liberation
that echoes throughout the Tantrāloka and Abhinava’s exegesis. All initiated Śaivites

are fit to attain liberation. There is no difference between them when they do, and

initation is the sole means to attain it. There is however a fundamental difference

between the lower common dualist Śaiva Siddhānta and that of the higher esoteric
systems like Krama and Trika. The votaries of the former make gradual progress in

maintaining the pure state they acquire through initiation, and can only attain liberation

after death. Those who are ready amongst the latter attain it immediately in this life by a
flash of intense insight. The same applies to those who attain the goal of the path of the
nondualist Śaiva philosophy of Somānanda and the Pratyabhijnā of Utpaladeva. They
are all initiated directly by the Deity through the intellectual knowledge of their identity

with it. Thus, Abhinava writes in the Mālinīvijayavārtika:

parameśānaśāstre tu ye samyagdīkṣitā narāḷḥ |
teṣāṁ naivāpavargasya lābhe bhedo ‘sti kaścana ||
na caitadatirikto ʻpi mokṣopāyo ‘sti kaścana |
kevalaṁ kvāpy anāyāsā jīvanmuktikrameṇa ca |l
śīghram eva parā siddhir yathāsmaddarśaneṣv iti |

kvāpi tattvāvalīyogaparipāṭīkramāc cirāt |lḷ

tais taiḥ kriyākalāpaiś ca labhyate paramaṁ phalam |

‘There is no difference whatsoever between those people who have been

properly initiated into the Supreme Lord’s scripture (parameśānaśāstre) when they
attain liberation. Nor is there any means to liberation (for them) apart from that. The
only (difference is that), in some cases, the supreme accomplishment (siddhi) (is

attained) quickly, without effort and through the process (that leads to) liberation in life,
as (taught) in our (higher esoteric) systems. In some cases, the highest fruit is attained

after a long time through a gradual course of unification with (and of the) series of
reality levels (tattva) and by means of the many various rituals.- MVV 1/193-196ab
Clearly, hauddhajñāna — ‘intellectual knowledge — is no bookish knowledge.
Rather, at its most developed level it is the insight of the Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyā)
that “T am Śiva and all ṭhis (objectivity) is my glory”. As we shall see in chapter four,
Abhinava refers to it as sattarka — ‘Sound Discriminative Reasoning’.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Even initiation is truly (satyam) liberating (only if it is) preceded
by (clear) intellectual insight (bauddhavijñāna). Thus, there (in that case)
also, it is intellectual knowledge that is fundamental.

Here (in this context), according to such dictums as:


‘The most

excellent teacher is one who possesses (this) knowledge even if he is devoid of
all (the other) characteristics (of a good teacher).'" Only the teacher who has
understood the meaning of the scriptures has the competence (to impart)
initiation. Thus it is said that (the teacher’s) main characteristic is (that he
should) ‘know the procedures (vidhāna) of the Śaiva scriptures and be expert in

knowledge and that which should be known.’ Otherwise, on the contrary: “O
(goddess) who is praised by the heroes, initiation is not successful when there is

no (knowledge of the) scriptures." According to this and similar dictums,

initiation would not be liberating (without intellectual knowledge) and so,

because the (direct) cause (kāraṇa) of initiation is intellectual knowledge (of the
procedures prescribed in the scriptures), without it (initiation) could not be

completed successfully.
ss If we read with MSs G,

C, J, Jh, N, and T sadyo for satyaṅ, the meaning would be

that when initiation is based on clear intellectual insight it is ‘immediately (sadyas)
liberatingʼ. This reading is indeed an interesting and convincing one. However, it
appears from Jayaratha’s commentary that despite his presentation in this sense of the

previous verse, he does not have this other reading before him, or at least chooses to
ignore its implications.
This line is also quoted below ad 4/60ab. A variant of this line is found below as

23/6ab. There it appears as a line of a verse Abhinava quotes from the
Kacabhārgavatantra, which may be another name for the Bhargaśikhā. This line is also
quoted by Kṣemarāja twice in his commentary on the Svacchandatantra ad 1/12 and ad
1/27. See below, 4/33-85 for an exposition of the characteristics of a teacher and his
intimate relationship with Sound Discriminative Reasoning (sattarka), that is, Pure
Knowledge (śuddhavidyā) that develops as insight into the purport of the scriptures.

ṢYṬ 1/13cd.

! ṢVṬ 1/24cd. Jayaratha emphasizes that the intellectual knowledge which ‘precedes’

initiation is that of how to perform it on the part of the teacher. However, it also means
the intellectual knowledge the disciple possesses, which precedes not only initiation but
also all other means by which consciousness expands (when spiritual knowledge

develops) in the disciple. Initiatioon removes the fundamental Impurity of the soul
(āṇavamala). Thus, it expands consciousness. This expanded consciousness is spiritual

knowledge. Even so, without the intellectual knowledge of the ultimate purport of the
scriptures, it cannot be understood.

Jayaratha says that the person who requires intellectual knowledge to make the

initiation successful is the teacher, who must know the scriptures that teach the

procedure, and knows how to initiate his disciple in the best way for him. Swami
Lakshmaṇjoo shifts the focus onto the disciple. Initiation can only be successful if the
disciple has the necessary understanding of the teaching of the scriptures — namely his
identity with Śiva. As Swami Lakshmanjoo says: ‘Initiation creates Pauruṣajñāna; but

it is effective only if the disciple has intellectual knowledge but not complete

intellectual knowledge as in Śāktopāya.

The objects of this ‘Intellectual Knowledge’ are, on the one hand, metaphysical,

namely, the true nature of reality, Śiya, the Self, the world and so on. On the other it
includes all aspects of practice. This ranges from the subtle contemplative practices,
which are Abhinava’s most favoured, to a wide range of Yogas of the breath, Kuṇḍalinī

TANTRĀḶLOKA


This is not just our own idea. Thus, he says:


TJTTI Jā ĪR-@_TTGIRCTĪTṀ: |I Y,I
mataṅgādau kr̥taṁ śrīmatkheṭapālādidaiśikaiḥ l 46 ||

These two (aspects of) knowledge and ignorance have been

distinguished (from one another) by (Saiddhāntika) teachers, beginning

with the venerable Khetapāla, in (their commentaries) on the Ruru,”
Svāyambhuva, and Mataṅga amongst others.
and the like, to concrete ritual performance. Thus, the liberation attained through such
knowledge may be achieved in a few exceptional cases, immediately or gradually over

time.

Intellectual Knowledge is knowledge of the scriptures, the ambit of which

Abhinava extends to include all that has been transmitted through the lineage of his
teachers. In this perspective, one could say that there are, broadly speaking, two aspects
of the one Trika tradition as Abhinava sees it. One includes the Śaiva scriptures, of

which the Trika Tantras are the culmination, and understood in the manner discussed, as
encompassing all the others. This is integrated with the lineage transmission of the

Krama, which possesses original root Tantras of its own. The other aspect is represented

by the teachings of the Masters. These may be directly explanatory of the Tantras or else

have developed as independent teachings that draw from them only secondarily,
acknowledging, of course, the authority of these scriptures. This means both Krama
teachings that may be written down — even in the form of scriptures which transmit the

originally oral tradition based on direct realisation, and the Pratyabhijñā. This is

presented by Somānanda, the author of the Śivadṛṣi, which is the first work of this
school, as the essential teaching of nondualist Śaivism transmitted through the lineage
of Trṛyambaka (see above, comm. 1/7-8 and below, 36/11-14). Significantly only

teachers, not Tantras, are mentioned in this context. Under this heading is also included

the Spanda lineage beginning with Vasugupta and Kallaṭabhaṭṭa. Knowledge of all this
multiple transmission (āgama) and how it applies to practice and direct experience, is

Intellectual Knowledge. Clearly, this cannot function as an aid to realisation without the

Spiritual Knowledge that shines by the removal of the fundamental Impurity of Spiritual
Ignorance that obscures the soul. But it is essential for a teacher to have the former.

Without it he would not know how to initiate others, which may involve elaborate ritual
procedures. Nor could he be a medium of transmission of the teachings.

“ The Ruru is the Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha, concering which and its names see entry in

Appendix volume concerning sources.
Abhinava is telling us here that his presentation of these two forms of knowledge —

pauruṣa and bauddha is inspired by the Siddhāntāgamas and their commentators.
Kheṭapāla, better known as Sadyojyotis, was the first known exegete of the Siddhānta.
He wrote commentaries on the Svāyambhuvatanīra and the Rauravāgama on which a
commentary was also written by. Bṛhaspati. Aniruddha and Rāmakaṇṭha, a few
generations later, wrote commentaries on the Mataṅgatantra.
It is significant that Abhinava should choose the Siddhāntas to frame his most
basic concern, that is, the attainment of knowledge that saves, and the eradication of the
ignorance that binds. But although the Siddhānta teaches this, it is not the complete
teaching. If it were, there would be no point in rising to the higher Bhairava and


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


That is said in the venerable Svāyambhuva:


‘Now, knowledge of Śiva operates in order to free (the soul) from the

bondage of the Impurity of the Śelf, (along with) the one called Māyā and

Karma, and in order to make Śiva’s state (śivatva) manifeṣt.%

‘Now, it is said that the (fundamental) beginningless Impurity (nala) of

the (countless) individual souls is their (basic) fettered state (pasutva). 1t is

said that the flux of the fetters (pāśa), namely, ignorance and the rest, that
depend (for their existence) on the existence of that (Impurity), is located within

that of the individual soul (pauruṣa). Therefore, in accord with (one’s) desire,

one should know that imperishable (akṣaya) liberation as it truly is.’

ultimately Trika Tantras. The Siddhānta has understood the nature of liberating
knowledge but cannot dispense it fully. The rites it teaches can remove spiritual
ignorance but not intellectual ignorance, at least not fully. This means that the
Siddhāntin may attain liberation but only after death. For it is only by insight that
liberation in this life is possible. To impart that, Abhinava abandons the Siddhānta
sources and turns to the Trika Niśāṭaṇatantra (1/50-51). The Siddhānta teaches the

gradual path based on the purification of the impurity of the ignorance inherent in the
soul. Trika and Krama teach the immediate path by the purification of the knowledge
based on reflection and insight. Just as the former is necessary for the latter, so the

Siddhānta continues to play a fundamental role in Abhinava’s Trika Śaivism.

The IFP transcript T. no. 39 is called Svāyambhuvāgamaḥ by the scribe, although all

the colophons refer to is as Svāyaṁbhuvasūtrasaṁgraha. From page 117 the text begins

again. Itis this which, in actual fact, is the Svāyaṁbhuvasūtrasaṁgraha. When referring

to a verse, I put the correct numbering of the chapter first (assuming the saṅgraha
begins where I stated) and following it in brackets the number of the chapter in this

transcript. The scribe of the transcript supplies variant readings from another manuscript

of which, unfortunately, he gives

and labelled A. A reads:

no notice. These variants are noted in square brackets

śivāj jñānaṁ pravartate — “knowledge comes forth from Śiva’

for śivajñānaṁ pravartate — knowledge of Śiva operatesʼ.

“ SvāSūSaṁ 1 (32)/2.
’ ŚvaSūSaṁ 2 (33)/lab. This line quoted below ad 9/66cd-67ab. In SyTu ad 5/884,
Kṣemarāja, saying that his source is the Svāyaṁbhuvasūtra, quotes this line along with

the following one that Jayaratha omits. There the second line reads:

tuṣakambukavaj jeyaṁ māyājam aikurasya tu I

‘One should know that (the Impurity) born from Maāyā is like the chaff and
integument of the sprout (of the fettered state) (see below note 9,419).
In the transcript the second half reads: māyāpāśāṁkuraṣya tat |

‘(One should know that that is like the chaff and integument) of the sprout of

the fetter of Māyā.

“! Read with the transcript pauruṣe sthitaḥ for pauruṣaḥ [, ḍ: puruṣaḥ] smṛtaḥ ʻs

considered to be that of the individual soul’. The reference here is to āṇavamala which
is inherent in the individual fettered soul as his fettered state. The two other Impurities —
that of Māyā and Karma — are aspects and development of this one.

ŚvāSūSaṁ 2 (33)/lab, 2 Read with MSs Ch, J, Jh:, ṄN, T, Ḍ and transcript 39: —

nādimalaṁ for -nādir malaḥ. Read with the transcript ~icchataḥ for ~icchatā. The lines

that follow are instructive:

patijñāṉaikagamyaṁ [Ā : gamyaikantaditareṣā] taditareṣām agocaram |
tena tatjñānanirmuktaḥ śuddhātmā bodhyate budhaiḥ [Ā : tajñānibhir mukto śuddhātmā

socyate budhaiḥ] || 3 |I

TANTRĀLOKA


So too in the venerable Ruru:

‘Those who are well versed in Mantra and the Tantras, worship with
many kinds of sacrificial rites, authorized (abhyanujñāta) (to do so) by the

teacher and the Tantras,' their bonds° severed by the initiation.

‘Men should not inquire with little intellect into (the nature of)
Mantras or reason about them (to determine whether they are effective or not).
Taking scripture (āgama) to be (their) authority (pramāṇa), the wise should

have faith in them.”
NT °All the deities are Mantras by nature and all Mantras, Śiva. Once having
known this Śiva nature, think only about Śiva accordingly.

So too in the venerable Mataṅgatantra:


"Thuṣ that Lord Īśa, shining with the jewels in the crest (of his matted

hair), the Emperor of Mantra burnt away like a heap of grass all the sage’s

‘It can only be attained by the knowledge of the Lord (patijñāna). Īt is not in

the purview of other things. Thus, the wise know that a pure soul is freed by that
knowledge.”
The

colophon

of

this

chapter

reads:

iti

svāyaṁbhuvaṣūtrasaṁgrahe

pāśavicāraś catustriṁśatpaṭalaḥ [Ā: vicārapaṭalo dvitīyaḥ] l

` This verse is Rauravasūtrasaṁṅgraha 2/21cd-22ab. Read with its edition and all the
MS except Kh and G: —nantratantra- for mantratattva-.

! Read with the published Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha: gurutantrābhyanujñātā for

gurutantrādy-anujñāta MSs Ch, T, Ḍ: jūātā].

Read with the Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha: —-bandhanāḥ — ‘bonds’ for —saṁśayāḥ —
‘doubts'.
“ The MSs of the TĀ read dīkṣāvicchinna- for dīkṣāsicchimna-, which is clearly a
typographical error.
ṉa mīmāṅṁsṣyā vicāryā vā mantrāḥ svalpadhiyā (K, Ch, Jh, T: na mīmāṁsā vicāryā vā

maniraṣvalpadhiyā; Ñ: na mimāṁsṣā vā vicāryā vā mantraṣvaḹpadhiyā; Ḍ: na mīmāṅṁsā
vicaryā vā maṁtrasvalpadhiyāṅṁ).
Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha reads hitaiṣibhiḥ [K: hiteṣṭibhiḥ] for vicakṣaṇaiḥ.

Rauravasūtrasaṁṅgraha 3/27. The Raurava reads śraddhātavyaṁ for Śśraddhātavyā.

The former reading means that the wise should have faith in the Āgamas. According to
the reading here there should be faith in the Mantras.
T Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha 3|28.
MS Kh reads: sarve varṇātmakā mantraḥ sarve varṇāḥ vātmakā — all Mantras are
phonemes by nature and all phonemes, Śiva’. This line i also found in the Sarvavīra

quoted ad 12/24cd.

The MSs read krtvā for jūātvā i.e ‘once fashioned (this Śiva nature).
" Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha 3/27 and 3/28.

! MPĀ vidyāpāda 2/6cd-7. The printed edition reads devah (‘god’) for īśaḥ;

jvālāvyūhena (with the mass of flamesʼ) for jvālāvīryeṇa (‘with the vitality of the
flames); samyag ajñānaṁ ((burt away) properly (the sage’s) ignorance) for sarvam
ajñānaṁ ((burnt away) all (the sage’s) ignorance).


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


ignorance with the vitality of the flames that arose from the fire of (His)

words.”

(That is) true knowledge which is the destruction of ignorance.

Devoid of impurity (amala), it has come forth from Śiva’s lotus mouth, and

facing in all directions (sarvatomukha), it is the disclosure of Śivahood. By

means of this, those who have achieved the goal (siddha) see (Śiva,) who is that

plane (of existence) which is free of (suffering and) disease.”
‘The restʼ includes, for example, the Cillācakreśvarīmata. 1t is said
there:
In his commentary on this verse, Rāmakaṇṭha identifies the ignorance mentioned

here with the fetters that once bound the sage’s soul. Similarly, Jayaratha understands
this to be a reference to his spiritual ignorance, that is, the fundamental Impurity of the
soul
(āṇavamala).
Thus,
although
the
Mataṅgatantra
(that
is,
the

Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama) does not directly refer to the distinction between spiritual
and intellectual knowledge and ignorance that Abhinavagupta elaborates here, one could
make a case that it is implicitly accepted. The same is true of the following verses

Jayaratha quotes, and indeed of all of these important Siddhānta sources. It may well be,
therefore, that the distinction is only clearly formulated in these terms by
Abhinavagupta himself, and (that he does) so as he cannot find exact, specific
references to this formulation. Although he acknowledges that it is formulated there

(above 1/46), he simply refers us to the sources (all of which are Siddhantāgamas) in a

general way (but see above note 1,494). The best reference Jayaratha could find is from
the Cillācakreśvarīmata, which was most probably written after Abhinava and so may

have been influenced by him. Even so, it distinguishes between intellectual (hauddha)

and spiritual (pauruṣa) Impurity (mala), not ignorance.

The following lines correspond to MPĀ vidyāpāda 17/68-69ab. The printed edition

reads -otpannam- for -odbhūtam-. The previous two lines say: ‘However, if the Lord’s
power of knowledge shines within the intellect, then, by the flux of the rays of its
inherent vitality (the knowledge which, Rāmakaṇṭha glosses, is its own inherent power
and illumines what is the good) prevails (pravartate).

" The cillā is a female Bengal eagle. Thus, the name of this Tantra literally means ‘the

Teaching of the Mistress of the Circle of Eagles’. Yoginīs commonly assume animal
forms. Thus, these female eagles are probably Yoginīs worshipped in this form. This
text has not been recovered. Vāmadeva quotes it twice in the Janmamaraṇavicāra (p. 4
and p. 9). Quote on p. 4:
māyā kalāśuddhavidyā rāgakālau niyantraṇā |
saḍ etāṉy āvṛtivaśāt kañcukāni mitātmanaḥ ||
evaṁ ca pudgalasyāntarmalaḥ kañcukavat sthitaḥ |

tuṣavat kañcukāni syusṣ tasmāj jīñānakriyojhitaḥ l

‘Māyā, the force (of limited capacity to act) (kalā) impure (limited capacity to

know) (aśuddhavidyā), attachment and time (as well as) the constraint (of Karma) —
these are the obscuring coverings (kañcuka) of the limited soul because they encompass

him. The inner Impurity of the individual soul is, in this way, like an obscuring

covering. The obscuring coverings are like chaff (that envelops grain), thus (that
Impurity) is bereft of knowledge and action.

ibid p. 9:
uktaṁṅ śrīcillācakreśvaramate —

TANTRĀLOKA

somasūryarasollāsaparasparanigharṣaṇāt |

jātavedasi saṁjāte madhyadhāmavikāsini ||
virāruṇaparīṇāmavaśād aṇkurasaṁbhavaḥ |
‘The mutual rubbing together of the (blissful) outpouring of the juice (rasa) of

the Moon and the Sun gives rise to the Fire which expands the abode in the centre
(madhyadhāman). By the transformation of the semen and the menstrual blood (that

takes place when this occurs), the sprout (of the first state of the embryo) arises.”
ekarātroṣitaṁ retaḥ siktaṁ kalilatāṁ vrajet Iḷ
budbudaṁ saptarātreṇa peśī māsena jāyate |
dvitīye māsi ca ghanastrtīyegnīparigrahaḥ ||

caturthe vyaṇgatāṇgānāṁ cetanā pañcame bhavet |
“The semen that was sown and sprinkled for one night becomes the fecundated
seed. In seven days it becomes (like) foam and in one month a fleshy foetus (pesī). In
the second month it becomes dense, in the third it is wrapped around the fire (of life)
and in the fifth the limbs that had become evident in the fourth (month) possess

consciousness.’

saṣṭhe sarvāṇgasaṁbhedaḥ saptame calanodgamaḥ ||
tejo'stame saṁcarati navame vedanaṁ bhavet |
saṁpūrṇadeho daśame māsi jantuḥ prajāyate ||
jāto'sau vāyunā spṛṣṭo yoniyantraprapīḍitaḥ |
‘In the sixth (month) all the limbs are distinct and in the seventh it begins to
move. In the eight, radiant (vital) energy (tejas) circulates (through it) and in the ninth
there is sensory awareness (vedana). In the tenth month the body is fully complete and
becomes a person. Touched by the breath (vāyu) (of life), he is pained by the machine of
the womb.”
na smaraty ugrasaṁtāpam anekabhavasaṁbhavam ||
krameṇa vṛddhimāyānti tasyaite dehahetavaḥ |
rasaḥ sthitiṁ prakurute raktaṁ saṁjīvayatyalam ||
māṁsaṁ vṛṁhayati prãāyo medaḥ snehayati sphuṭam |
‘He does not recall the terrible suffering that has arisen through many lives
(bhava) and progressively these, the causes of his body grow (and develop). The juice

(of digested food) gives stability and (forms) blood that is sufficient to give life (to the

body) (whilst) the flesh generally increases it and fat clearly becomes sinew.’

dhārayanti tathāsthīni majjāntaḥsārasaṁśrayā |l

harṣotkarṣakaraṁ śukraṁ mūtraṁ kledavivekakṛt |

vāyvagniṣaṁrodhakaraṁ purīṣaṁ parikrtitam ||

p. 10) svedakledopakaraṉaṁ garbhaheturathārtavam ḷ

evaṁ śarīram āsādya ṣāṭkośaṁ tatparigrahāt |
anapekṣya nijaṁ bhāvaṁ pumān bhāvān apekṣate |

‘The bones in the same way sustain it and the marrow rests in their inner
essence. Sperm gives rise to joy and elevation. Urine creates moisture and discernment.
Faeces are said to block (excessive) wind and fire (in the body) and are the secondary
cause of sweat and moisture (of the body). The fertile season is the cause of the


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘That Impurity (mmala) is considered to be of two kinds — intellectual and
spiritual. There, (out of these two,) spiritual Impurity is destroyed by initiation

and the like, (whereas) intellectual (Impurity) is not. It continues to be active

to varying degrees as long as the intellectual knowledge has not arisen that
destroys (the ignorance) which is of its same kind and correctly distinguishes
the essence (of reality) and what it is not.”

Initiation cannot make spiritual knowledge manifest as long as it is not

preceded by intellectual knowledge and so, for that reason also, (the latter) is

said to be the main (pradhāna) (form of knowledge).

How can such intellectual knowledge also arise in this way apart from

the Supreme Lord’s scripture? Thus, that itself is here (in our view) the main
(means,) because it is the root cause (of liberation). Thus, he says:

hÉIEVIEEIIEIFAGHIECA

tathāvidhāvasāyātmabauddhavijñānasampade |
śāstram eva pradhānaṁ yaj jñeyatattvapradarśakam || 47 II

Scripture (śāstra), which reveals the (true) nature of (all) that
needs be known (jñeyatattva), is īndeed the principal (factor) that serves
to bring about the intellectual understanding which is that kind of
(liberating) insight (avasāyā).
(Scripture is the principal factor that serves) ‘to bring about’, that is, to

generate that (liberating insight). This is the meaning. This is because ‘the
nature of (all) that needs be known’, that is, of ‘blue’, ‘pleasureʼ and the like,

is Śiva’s nature, which is the Light (of consciousness that makes all things
manifest), because (its) manifestation (lit. its ‘shining’) could not otherwise be

(impregnation of) the womb. Having obtained a body in this way, consisting of six
(vital) sheaths by taking (all) this up, disregarding his own condition (bhāva), the person
(thus constituted) is dependent (on the many outer) things (bhāva).’

' One could perhaps emend samudritam to sumudritam — ‘well impressed’. MS Ñ
reads:

—samuddhatam

and

D:

—samudditaṁ. Theṣe readings suggest the preferred emendation -samuditam — ‘active’.

' AII ṭthe MSs read -prakāśakam ‘illumineṣ’ for -pradarśakam ʻreveals'. Although

Jayaratha’s explanation is consonant with the variant, he comments on the reading —
pradarśakam (with which all the MSs agree) and so that has been retained.

' The meaning of the word jñeyatattva is also ‘the true nature of the object of
knowledge.’ This is the way it is also understood below in verses 52 ff.

Swami Lakṣhmanjoo explains: Advaitaśāstra is a must for Bauddhajñāna, but Dīkṣā

[initiation] is a prerequisite for that. Pauruṣajīāna must be there first, then
Bauddhajñāna is glorious. It will purify itself and others also. If there is only
Bauddhajñāna, it is no use. But it is in fact impossible to have Bauddhajñāna; unless
Aṇavamala is destroyed. So Pauruṣajīāna and Bauddhajñāna grow together.

TANTRĀLOKA

logically possible.”" (Scripture) ‘reveals’ it because, by teaching supreme
nonduality (parādvaya), (scripture) defines (abhidāyaka) (the ultimate nature of
all things). This is the meaning. Thus, the difference between this (our Śaiva
scripture) from other scriptures that do not reveal that is also implicitly

acknowledged (kaṭākṣita).

Surely, (one may ask,) let it be so (as you say), but why is liberation

(attained) here (in this case only) when the body comes to an end if spiritual

ignorance has ceased, whereas when intellectual knowledge ceases, it (is
attained) just then (at that very moment)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

iāe tc®ezits EṭItāeiEiIEḤ

fē aaq 1| ¢ Il

dīkṣayā galite ‘py antarajñāne pauruṣātmani |
dhīgatasyānivṛttatvād vikalpo ‘pi hi sambhavet || 48 ||
Even when inner spiritual ignorance has (inwardly) ceased by
virtue of initiation, (binding) thought would (nevertheless still) arise

because (the ignorance) present in the intellect has not ceased.

(What is being discussed is) the ignorance ‘present in the intellect’.
‘Thought’ is the perception of relative distinctions (bhedaprathā), and that is
The reality underlying objectivity (i.. ‘all that needs to be known’) is Śiva’s
essential nature (sśivatā) which is the Light of consciousness (prakāśa). Without it no
object could manifest (lit. ‘shine’) within consciousness and thus exist in any way that

could be known. Note that this view does not entail that what is unknown is non-

existent. Whatever exists can be known, it is ‘knowable’ and, indeed, ‘should be known’
and is ‘what is to be knownʼ (all translations of the term ‘jñeya’). Anything which is, or

can be, an object of knowledge, must necessarily appear within consciousness to be
known.
Intellectual knowledge is the insight that everything is the one Śiva consciousness in

the form of the Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyā) that ‘I am all this and all this is me’.
This deep understanding of the true purport of the scriptures, cannot arise unless the

spiritual ignorance which contracts consciousness is removed by initiation. Conversely,
initiation is not possible or effective without intellectual knowledge because without
insight, doubt is not removed and doubt gives rise to more binding thought constructs,

even if consciousness has expanded and spiritual knowledge has developed through

initiation and practice. If intellectual ignorance persists, mistaken notions are always

liable to lead the practitioner astray. So, the two support each other and must develop
together.

" T translate the word ‘prathā’ here as ‘perception’, some translate the word as

‘experience’. lts sense in common parlance is, more literally, that of ‘spreading out’,
‘extending, ‘unfolding and so, by extension, ‘displaying’. One could translate

bhedaprathā as just ‘expansion’ or ‘unfolding’ of bheda ~ ‘division’, ‘relative

distinctionsʼ, in short, duality. However, by doing so the intrinsic connection with

perception, that is, the act of knowing which coincides with the appearing of what is

known, would be ignored. Compare the expression ‘citsvarūpaprathā’, which I translate
as the ‘unfolding insight (prathā) into the (true) essential nature (svarūpa) of
consciousness (cir). Also, ‘pūrṇaprathā’, which I translate as ‘the full (and perfect)


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


an absence of knowledge (of the one reality) (akhyāti) and so is ignorance. This
has been said many times.
Surely, (one may ask,) if the ignorance present in the intellect has not

ceased, then what difference does it make to the Self (when the body comes to
an end and with it the intellect)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

aaiṁ fi-r |

dehasadbhāvaparyantam ātmabhāvo yato dhiyi |
dehānte ʻpi na mokṣaḥ syāt pauruṣājñānahānitaḥ l| 49 ||
As the sense of one’s own (corporeal) identity is present in the

intellect right up to the end of the body’s existence, but not so also when the

body has come to an end, (an initiate’s) liberation (takes place then)
because (only his) spiritual ignorance has been destroyed (by initiation).
Even an initiate will for the time determined (niyata) (by his residual

Karma) grasp (and perceive) his own (embodied) identity (ārtmagraha) within

(his) intellect. Thus, because the two (that is, the intellect and one’s own
(pūrṇa) unfolding of insight (pārṇaprathā)’. One could also translate simply as the
‘unfolding (or expansion) of consciousness’ or (the reality) which is ‘full (and perfect).

This would convey the sense of the unfolding revelation or manifestation of it, but

would not take into account the knowing of it. Ignorance is apūrṇaprathā, which means

both unfolding (perception) of (the aspect of reality which is) incomplete or

‘incomplete unfolding (of complete and perfect consciousness). In short, the term
‘prathā’, despite its common primary sense of ‘spreading out’ etc., is here to be
understood more in the sense of ‘perception’ or ‘knowledge’, and by extension,

‘manifestation’ʼ. The term indicates that consciousness and the cognitive activity that
accompanies it is an extending, unfolding dynamic process. This is true whether the

‘unfolding perception’ is that of full and perfect consciousness, as it is of duality, which
is the same ‘unfolding’ but in its incomplete (apūrṇa) form, or of what is incomplete,

that is, duality and relative distinctoons (bheda), rather than the pure essential nature of

consciousness alone. By translating the word prathā as ‘experience’ʼ, one would

conclude that this view teaches that everything is ‘experience’. Ultimate reality is the

experience of oneness, whereas the daily reality of the ignorant fettered soul is the
experience of duality (bhedaprathā). However, that translation fails to note the noetic

nature of ‘experience’.

dehānte lit. ‘when the body comes to an end’.
Intellectual ignorance is described here as ‘laying hold of oneself within the

intellectʼ. Laying hold or grasping oneself that way means to perceive one’s own
subjectivity as being there rather than within pure consciousness. The perception of

oneself in the intellect is a notion of oneself. It is a thought construct based on

objectivity and relative distinctions. It is to perceive oneself objectively as ‘I am so and
s0’, to which may be associated any number of notions based on an understanding of

oneself as variously identified with a range of objectively perceived entities, starting
with the grossest, which is the body, as when we think, ‘ am fat’ or ‘Ī am thin’. The

TANTRĀLOKA

limited perception of oneself within it) are not (essentially) different.
possible for intellectual ignorance to thrive within oneself (even when spī
ignorance has been eliminated by taking initiation). This is the sense (of this
verse).
Thus because (this) perception of one’s own (embodied) identity that
takes place within the intellect ceases when the body comes to an end, and
because spiritual ignorance has been previously destroyed by initiation and the
rest, (one attains) liberation. So it has been rightly said that ‘that knowledge (of
the Self) manifests clearly (only) when that body comes to an end.”
(Binding) thought arising here in this way is an intervening obscuration
to liberation (after initiation). Thus, liberation (is not attained) at that very
moment. But if it does not arise again, (he attains) liberation even when the

body still exists (and he is alive). Thus, he says:

ā̄ mī] ṣcgh rI TatrāTa 1| o 1|

ītsfsEe'tāútctzzie

bauddhājñānanivrttau tu vikalponmūlanād dhruvam |
tadaiva mokṣa ity uktaṁ dhātrā śrīmanniśāṭane || 50 ||
vikalpayuktacittas tu piṇḍapātāc chivaṁ vrajet |
itaras tu tadaiveti śāstrasyātra pradhānataḥ | 51 |
body, which is objective, can be fat or thin, the ‘I’ can never be an object such that it can
have such objective attributes. The same applies to notions such as ‘I see’ or ‘ḹ am
blindʼ, which is at the level of sensory subjectivity, identified with the senses. ‘I am

happy or sad relates to the mind and so on. All these ways of ‘grasping oneself within
the intellect’, that is, conceiving oneself intellectually, are thought constructs (vikalpa).

Until the correct intellectual knowledge of oneself as pure consciousness that can never

be an object arises, which is not a thought construct, the fettered soul is subject to the
intellectual ignorance of such limited notions of its own nature. In this sense, one can
say that intellectual ignorance persists as long as identification with the psychophysical

organism persists.

Above, 1/43cd. Abhinava says here, and is echoed by Jayaratha, that those who have

maintained the spiritual knowledge acquired by initiation intact will be liberated when
the body dies, because the binding activity of the intellect with its mistaken notions of
personal identity and the world ceases. However, this is not always guaranteed.
Accordingly, Abhinava repeatedly discusses the condition of the dying man. He
presents and supports by reasoned argument the famous passage in the Bhagavadgītā
where Kṛṣṇa declares that the soul transits to another body impelled by the desires and

notions the dying person has at the moment of death (28/324cd ff). This implies that

even at the moment of death intellectual knowledge is essential. This is a very important

matter for Abhinava, who devotes a great deal of attention to teaching post-mortem

initiatory rites and Mantras imparted to the dying or recently departed (see chapters 19,
21 and 24; also 28/308 ff). A cardinal example of the later is the Brahma Vidyā (see
19/33 ff., and 30/62cd-90ab). These serve to clean up any remaining spiritual ignorance
and sustained liberating insight.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


(However,) liberation is most certainly (achieved) just then,

intellectual ignorance ceases, because (binding) though

when

t has been uprooted.

Thus the Benefactor has said in the venerable Niśātanatantra: “He whose

mind is yoked (yukta) to thought attains Śiva (only) after
the body dies,
whereas the other (aspirant who is free of thought attains Him)
that very

moment.” This is because here (intuitive insight into the meaning of the)

scriptures is primary. (50-51)

This (teaching) is not without scriptural authority. Thus he says

(the

Benefactor Himself) ‘has said’ etc. ‘The other (aspirant) is
one who is free of
thought. (He attains liberation) ‘just then’, (even) when the (living)
body still

exists.” This is the meaning. As is said there itself (in the Niśāṭanatantra):

1/50-51 is a paraphrase of three lines Jayaratha quotes directly from the Niśātana

(1/50d). The first line is paraphrased below as 13/242ab and
quoted literally by
Jayaratha. These lines and three preceding them are paraphrased
as 14/42cd-45.

Jayaratha quotes all six ad 14/42cd-45. The same idea is reworked in 16/199cd

-220ab

and elaborated from line 196cd to 220ab. Jayaratha informs us (ad 16/196cd
-220ab) that
this subject is discussed at length in the first chapter of the Niśāṭanatantra.
Liberation is
immediate for those free of thought constructs when intellectual ignoranc
e ceases and
after death for those who are freed from spiritual ignorance by initiation

When intellectual ignorance has been eradicated by a sound knowledg
e, free of
thought constructs, of the nondual reality taught in the scriptures, and spiritual
ignorance

has been remedied by initiation, the soul is liberated whilst living
in the body
(jīvanmukta). The expanded consciousness of spiritual knowledge
is always liable to
contraction without intellectual insight of the soul’s essential
identity as pure

consciousness. There is no self-knowledge without intellectual knowledge.

the soul who possesses that insight is liberated there and then, it follows

Indeed, if

that knowledge

of the scriptures, in this sense, is even more important than taking initiation.
! Jayaratha prefers not to interpret ‘just then’ (tadaiva) in the way which appears

to be

the most evident, namely, that the aspirant whose fundamental spiritual
impurity has
been removed attains liberation in this life in the very instant his intellectu
al ignorance

ceases. In other words, liberation in the body is achieved in an instant. It is
not in the
domain of practice. Liberation after death, which is much more common,
requires
practice even though the initiate is already essentially pure. The fact that we
are already

perfect is not a reason not to practice or to have no goals of any sort
in life. Indeed, it is
just the other way around. It is because of this inherent purity that
practice and the

attāinment of its goal is possible. Thus, the more we are pure, the more we practice.

Practice is the concrete expression of that purity. It sustains and reveals
it. The need to
practice is a natural reaction to the realisation that we are already essential
ly free in our

oneness with our own unlimited and divine consciousness. The more the freedom,
the
greater the practice, the more intense the zeal, the greater our openness to face
anything

and courage to give everything we have to the Light, knowing that we have
nothing and
are simply freely returing what has been freely given. The liberated
life is the fullest
most unrestricted expression of the same attitude. But now suddenly
we enter that
oneness and live, even in our daily life, the experience of the perfect
plenitude which,

requiring nothing, pours out of its plenitude into perfectly selfless action that

illumineṣ

and benefits the world. The inner stillness is the ground of the limitless
activity of ‘Nonactionʼ that creates, sustains and withdraws all things. The liberated
life is the cosmic
life lived in transcendental oneness with Deity for the benefit of others.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘He whose mind is yoked to thought attains Śiva (only) after the body

falls away. He whose mind is free of thought sees” himself as

imperishable Śiva by the purity of (his) state (bhāva) and is, without a doubt,

liberated whilst alive (jīvanmukta).

(Thus) he now concludes (this discussion concerning) the primacy of
scripture he had introduced (as a topic) previously. The word ‘thus’ (iti) (which
marks the end of the quotation) should be applied (with reference to the two
things, that is, the one which precedes (that is the quotation) and the other one
which follows (that is the following sentence) in accord with the maxim of the

eye of a crow.” Thus (the ‘itī’) should be explained (to be indicating both) the

end (of the quote) from the venerable Niśāṭana and the reason (why the
scripture is primary for the attainment of liberation in this life). And that, as was
said previously also, ‘reveals the (true) nature of (all) that needs be known

(ñeyatattva)

The first line is quoted below ad 13/242ab and as TĀ 14/44cd. All three lines are

quoted again as part of a longer passage below ad 14/42cd-45. Read as we find there

and in MSs Ch, Jh, N, D: vikalpakṣīṇacittas for vikalpahīnacittas.

Ch: paśyato; T: paśyante; Ḍ: paśyata.
Insṭead of hy ātmānaṁ the same citation below ad 14/42cd-45 and MSs Ch, Jh, Ñ, T
and D read: ātmānaṁ, which is thus the accepted reading.

Observe Abhinava’s interpretation of this verse and his subtle reworking of a few

words to align it better to his agenda of promoting instant realisation as the door to
liberation in the present life (jīvanmuktúi). Liberating realisation is an ‘all or nothingʼ
affair. It requires the total cessation of thought or, to put it another way, total entry into
perfectly pure nirvikalpa consciousness, that is, one totally devoid of even the slightest
trace of objectivity, free of all dichotomy between ‘inner’ nirvikalpa and ‘outer’

savikalpa.

See above, note 1,88. The word ‘ii’ is used to mark the end of quotations or

statements, as are inverted comma. It can also serve to indicate a reason and so could be
translated as ‘thuṣ’.

Above, 1/47d. Abhinava summarizes what he has said up to now in the following

passage of the Tantrasāra (p. 2-S). What he says here about why he wrote the
Tantrasāra, applies equally to the Tantrāloka: Here (according to us), knowledge is the
cause of liberation because it counters ignorance, which is the instrumental cause of
bondage. And ignorance is of two kinds. One is present in the intellect and (the other is)
spiritual (pauruṣa). The one present in the intellect is the lack of conviction (concerning
the true nature of the Self) and a reversed conviction (that the Self is what it is not).
Spiritual Ignorance consists essentially of (the veil of) thought constructs, which is the
contracted experience (of the nature of reality). As we shal
explain when discussing the

nature of Impurity, that itself is the root cause of transmigratory existence. Although

spiritual ignorance is remedied by initiation and the like, even so, that cannot take place
if the ignorance present in the intellect, which is an absence of (sound) judgement
(adhyavasāya), exists. This is because initiation, which consists of the purification of
the (initiand’s) reality levels (tattvaśuddhi) and (his) conjunction with Śiva, is
(mecessarily) preceded by a convinced ascertainment (on his part) of what should be
reject and what should be adopted. (Now) there (in that case), the knowledge that is

well-established in the intellect, that consists of (sound) judgement, is fundamental.

Only that, in the course of its exercise, destroys ignorance, including the spiritual one.

This is because the exercise of consciousness with (sound) conceptions (of reality)
ultimately culminates in (the liberated state) free of conceptual representations.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Now what is the nature of the object (of perception) (jūeya) such that,

in the course of its being revealed, it should bring about the understanding that
(a knowledge of the) scriptures is primary (for the attainment of liberation in
this life)? With this question in mind, he says (the following).
The a priori Nature of Śiva Consciousness

Ṝa: |

TGTITTTĀ
TĪRTY TKTTĪ aTI /II 4RII

jñeyasya hi paraṁ tattvaṁ yaḥ prakāśātmakaḥ śivaḥ |

na hy aprakāśarūpasya prākāśyaṁ vastutāpi vā || 52 |

(Now) the knowledge that should be adopted consists of a proper convinced

ascertainment that is well grounded in all that is true (samastavastu) in every respect,
namely, that the nature of the Self, which is the light of consciousness uncontracted by

thought constructs, is Śiva. And that (conviction) is preceded (by the study of) scripture.

Only scripture that is spoken by the Supreme Lord is authoritative (pramāṇa). This is

because (it is generally) accepted that, in that regard (tatra), the subject (artha) taught in
other scriptures is quite different (from the one taught by the Supreme Lord), and also
because (their authoritativeness) is said to be proved by arguments that are related to a
different reality (artha) (than is the concern of Śaiva scriptures). Thus, the knowledge
taught in other scriptures liberates from just a certain commensurate amount of
ignorance, not from all of it. It is (only) the Supreme Lord’s scripture that liberates from

all of it, and that consists of five currents divided into ten, eighteen and eight times eight

divisions (i.e. scriptures). The essence (drawn) from all (of them) consists of the Trika
scriptures. And (the essence drawn) from them also is the Mālinīvijaya. (However), it is
impossible to elucidate the subject matter (artha) contained therein without having
(first) made it coherent. Nor can the true nature of reality that has not been elucidated
serve to liberate (oneself) or liberate (others), simply because it is pure (complete and
certain) knowledge alone that is such (i.e. liberating). Thus, because the root (of the
aṭtainment of) the supreme goal of life (puruṣārtha) is well practiced knowledge, this
(work) is undertaken in order that that may be achieved.
Indeed, it is said in the scripture that ignorance is the cause of bondage, and
that is considered to be Impurity (mala). All that becomes devoid of (any) basis, and
liberation (is achieved) when the power of full (and perfect) knowledge dawns as does
one's own consciousness, the Impurity of which has been entirely destroyed. Thus, by
means of this treatise I will render clear and lucid the entire reality that needs be known.

(Thus ends) the introduction.”
1 have translated the expression jñeyatattva as ‘the nature of (all) that needs be

known’. Now in this different context jñeya, which literally means, ‘what needs to be
known’ or ‘should be known’, is better translated as ‘object of perception’. In this sense,
the word belongs to a triad of terms that together denote three aspects of perception,
namely, ‘jñātr̥’ — the ‘knower” or ‘perceiver’, jñāna — knowledge or perception, and
jñeya — the object of knowledge or object of perception. Moreover, when we are not
talking about some specific perceiver or type, the word ‘jñātr denotes the subject, and
by extension, his subjectivity in general. Similarly, the word ‘jñeya’ may denote

objectivity in general. So sometimes, according to the context, I also translate in that
way.

TANTRĀLOKA

The supreme reality (paraṁ tattvam) of the object (of perception)

is Śiva Whois the Light (of consciousness), for that whichis not Light can

neither be illumined (i.e. be made manifest) nor even have (any) existence

(vastutā).

This verse connects to verse 47 above. The first line is quoted above in the comm. on

1/26 and below in that on 1/54. Note that in both cases the reading is jñeyasya ca instead
of jñeyasya hi as it is here.

The second line of th
following passage:

verse is quoted in MM (p. 36) as the conclusion of the

kulālādīnāṁ kumbhādyapekṣayā kiñcid ajāḍye ‘pi parameśvarāpekṣayā jāḍyam eveti

suṣṭhūktaṁ kāryakāraṇabhāva eva sarve sambandhāḥ, kāraṇaṁ ca kartaiveti | evaṁ ca
sati
tatra paramaśivād upari na kartrantarasphuraṇam, prṛthivyā upari na
kāryāntarotpattīś ca | tayor yaḥ pratipadārthamānupūrvyeṇa vyavahriyamāṇo

madhyavartī
tattvasaṁghāta-rūpo
‘rthaḥ,
tasya
pratyakṣādipramāṇopagṛhyamāṇasya
paryantataḥ
prakāśa
evānuprāṇanatayā
svabhāva ity anvayavyatirekābhyām avadhāryate, anyathā cakṣurādisāmagryām api
teṣām aprakāśamānatvāpatteḥ |

‘Potters, for example, are sentient to some degree in relation to the pot etc. (they

make). Even so, it is rightly said that in relation to the Supreme Lord they are as if

insentience itself. AIl relationships (between things) are (ultimately) just that between
cause and effect, and the cause is an agent. Moreover, this being s0, no other agent
manifests above Supreme Śiva, and nor does any other effect arise (below) beyond

Earth. A phenomenal entity consists of a coalescence of metaphysical principles and,

located in between these two (extremes), drawn towards itself
by the intellect, functions

(in daily life) in accord with each (relevant) category of existing things. Perceived by
the means of knowledge such as direct perception and the rest, its nature is ultimately

the light (of consciousness) as that which gives it life (and existence). This is understood
(to be s0) by both positive and negative concomitance. (Thus, if it were) otherwise, even

if the aggregate (of factors that make for perception,) such as the sense of sight and the
rest, are present, the (undesirable) consequence would be that they would not manifest.”
MM p. 36: yad uktaṁ nareśvaraviveke na prathetāprathārūpaṁ nāśvetaṁ śvetate yathā iti |

yathã ca śrītantrāloke -

na hy aprakāśarūpasya prākāśyaṁ vastutāpi ca iti | TĀ 1/52cd

tataś_cāntaḥsthaḥ ṣvātmaprakāśa eva bahiḥ prakāśyaprapañcatayā sphuratīty etat
tāvad
.abhyupagantavyam

ca
sattriṁśato

prakāśasvabhāvatvāviśeṣāt pṛthivyāpa ityādir anyonyaviśeṣato vyavahāro na
saṁbhavati | . vyavahriyate ca viśeṣaḥ pratyakṣam eva lokena | anyathā
jalasthalavibhāgāder arthakriyāṁ praty aniyamāpatteḥ | sa ca viśeṣaḥ svahṛdayagatayā
vimarśasattayaivotpadyate | utpattiś ca tādātmye paryavasyati | yad yaj jātaṁ tat tad
eva hīty uktatvāt | uṉmeṣapadenaitad āha —
svātmavimarśadrumasya pallavapuṣpādiprāyam etad viśvavaicitryasphuraṇam iti
‘As is said in the Nareśvaraviveka: ‘One does not perceive (anything) that is
not perceived (aprathā), just as what is not white does not become white (śvetate).”
As (is said) in the Tantrāloka: ʻthat which is not Light can neither be illumined
(i.e. be made manifest) nor even have (any) existence (vastutā).
Thus the Light of one’s own Self, which is located within, shines as the

external unfolding development of the object of illumination. One must accept it to be
such. Thus, because (all) thirty-six principles are (equally) without distinction the Light


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


The ‘blueness” of ‘blue’ and the like which is ‘the object (of
perception) is its ongoing manifestation (prakāśamānatā), which is not, as

such (tāvat), its essential nature, for if it were to be, then it would be (manifest)

to everybody all the time, not just to somebody sometimes. Thus, everybody
would be omniscient. And so (the manifest state of an object) is possible only
(if) conjoined with a perceiver whose nature is the Light (of consciousness) (in
such a way that it is experienced as) ‘it manifests (lit. ‘shines’) to him” (or) ʻit

manifests to meʼ. (Phenomena) like ‘blue’ are not concluded (paryavasita)

independently in their own nature (without reference to a perceiver). Śiva
Himself is the perceiver whose nature is the light (of consciousness), because
anything else apart from that is afflicted with conceived notions (vikalpa) of

unity and difference (bhedābheda).” Thus, because the object of knowledge,

that is, ‘blue’ etc. manifests (lit. ‘shines’), (Śiva, who is the perceiver that
illumines it, and so is the source of its manifest nature,) is Himself (its) ultimate

reality (paramārtha), (and s0) ‘the supreme reality (paraṅ tattvam) is Śiva
Who is the Light (of consciousness).”

Surely (one may object), even if it is not such by itself (i.e. luminously

manifest), (the object) will become such by (its) association (saṁbandha) with

the Light (of consciousness). With this doubt in mind, he says: ‘that which is

(of consciousness), the business (of daily life) that is due to the mutual distinction
between Earth and Water and the rest, (should) not be possible. It is directly perceived
by people (lokena) that the difference (viśeṣa) (between things is actually) operating (in

everyday life). Otherwise (if that were not s0), the undesirable consequence would be

that the division between water and dry land (sthala) and the like, in terms of their
function would not be fixed (and invariable). Moreover, that difference (viśeṣa) arises as
being essentially (perceived through an act of) reflective awareness which is
instinctively accepted (to be correct). And its arising ultimately culminates in a state of
oneness (tādātmya). For it is said that (an entity) is as it has arisen (to be). That (arising)
is referred to by the term ‘opening upʼ (unmeṣa). It is said:
‘The radiant flashing forth of the wonderful variety of all things is like the

sprouts and flowers of the tree of the reflective awareness of one’s own Self.”

etena . parāparapramātroḥ
prakāśavimarśānuprāṇanatvaṁ
paryantatas
tayor
aikātmyaṁ (p. 37) ca vyākhyātam | paramaśiva iti | uktarāūpaṁ cāsṣya svātantryaṁ
viśvottirṇatvamātre
viśrāmyati,
na
punar
viśvamayaviśvottirṇatvalakṣaṇe
paramasvātantryasaṁpatsāmrājye, tādṛkṣyabhāvasya ca pratyāhārānaucityāt, pratyuta
tasya pratyāhartr̥tvam eva svabhāva iti || 12 ||
It is explained in this way that the oneness of the two, that is, the supreme and
inferior perceiver, is ultimately the vitalizing power of the reflective awareness of the
light (of consciousness) (p. 37). The freedom, previously described, (that Paramaśiva)

possesses brings (all things) to rest in transcendence alone. For it is not proper that one’s

own (innate nature), which is such and is within the empire of the wealth of supreme
freedom that is (both) transcendent and immanent, be withdrawn. Rather, on the
contrary, (one’s own) innate nature (svabhāva) is the state of withdrawal itself.”

This may be the unity of the perceiver and diversity of the object. It may also be the

unity and difference of the relationship between things. For there to be relationship,
there must be something in common between the relata. Obviously, there must also be
difference between them.
" The objection is that it is not necessarily the case that whatever manifests is the Light
of consciousness that shines in that way. One could also maintain that the object is not

TANTRĀLOKA

not (Light) etc. Even though ‘blue’, for example, manifests in association
(saṁbandha) with the Light (of consciousness), it manifests insofar as it is itself
(svayam) the light (that shines in that way) (prakāśarūpa). And it could not be
that what is unmanifest (lit. ‘not light’) by nature manifests (lit. ‘shines’). A

building that is not white does not become white (śverate).

Nor would it have real existence in that way (i.e. as a white building).
(Something) having abandoned its manifest state (prakāśarūpatā) (as that
particular object) could not become something else. This is the overall sense.
In this way, not only is the true nature (tattva) of what exists (bhāva) as

an object (of perception), such as

‘blue’, Śiva, who is the light (of

consciousness), because it manifests (lit. ‘shines’), but (such also is the nature)

of what does not exist. Thus, he says:

3JTTSTTĪU ṂWTTTĪ TCPṀTTTTHT |I

avastutāpi bhāvānāṁ camatkāraikagocarā |
yat kuḍyasadṛṣī neyaṁ dhīr avastv etad ity api || 53 |I
The non-existence (avastutā) of entities is also in one (and the same)

field of the wonder (of consciousness as is their existence). The notion

(dhī) “ṭhīs is non-existent (avastu)” is not similar to (an inert object such as)

a wall."

Even a notion (buddhi) of the form ‘there is no jar here’ is of the nature
of consciousness (bodha), and so differs from an inert entity such as a wall.
Thus, because the non-existence (abhāva), for example, of a jar (on an empty

piece of ground or where some other object is located, is) known (to the
intellect) (buddhyamāna), it is, (as is anything that manifests in any way,
whether externally or in the mind,) Śiva, Who is one dense (unbroken)

consciousness and supreme bliss. This is the meaning. They say that:

the Light but becomes manifest when illumined and made manifest by the light of
consciousness. This is essentially the dualist Sāṁkhya’s view. The answer to this

objection is that if that were so, the manifestation of anything would be impossible,
because if unmanifest means independent of the Light of consciousness, it could not
exist, because ‘existence’ and manifestation are one and the same.

The same analogy is found in the Nareśvaraviveka, quoted in MM p. 36.
‘Wonder’ (camatkāra) īs the primary characteristic of consciousness; it is indicative

of its sentience, which distinguishes it from the insentient (iaḍa). See note 1,11.

! Everything that appears in any way within the field of perception - even the notion
that something does not exist — is illumined by the light of consciousness. Nothing

exists outside it. Moreover, whatever appears in any form, is illumined by the light of
consciousness and so participates in its luminous, conscious nature, otherwise, it would

be outside consciousness and non-existent. How ‘non-existence’ is perceived, as
exemplified by the perception of the absence ofa jar in a certain place, is a surprisingly
complex epistemological problem. See Torella 1987: 57 ff.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘even that which is insentient, in the course of being known (to the

intellect), is the Lord Himself, Whose nature is consciousness.’

Surely, (one may ask, agreed that) once the existence of the Light (of

consciousness) has been proved, one can prove that the ultimate reality of the
object of perception, both existent and non-existent, is one with that. But by
what (sure and certain) means of knowledge is that (Light) proved to exist?

With this doubt in mind, he says:


TRTĪ] TT āATĀ Jdd JTYTT |

prakāśo nāma yaś cāyaṁ sarvadaiva prakāśate |

anapahnavanīyatvāt kiṁ tasmin mānakalpanaiḥ || 54 I|

Indeed, this Light (of consciousness) shines at all times; so, as it

cannot be denied, what is the use (of applying) contrived means of
knowledge to it? (All that needs be done is to recognise that the One Light
exists and that it ilumines the manifestation of all things.)

Indeed, a means of knowledge has as its object something new (that has
not been known before). As they say: “A means of knowledge (is defined as
having) as its object (an entity) not (as yet) known, or (to put it another way), it

is the (cognitive) light (that illumines) something that is unknown.’ There is

no novel manifestation (lit. ‘light’) of the light (of consciousness), because it

continues to shine ‘aṭ all timesʼ, and so, ‘because it cannot be deniedʼ, it is

useless to contrive means of knowledge there (in that case to know it or prove

its existence). If that (were possible), then its manifestation (lit. ‘light’) would

be novel, and if so, because it was previously unknown, it would not manifest

(lit. ‘shine’) (at that previous time). And that sort of absence would also occur in
the case of the recollection of a previous time that is devoid of that. (However,)

memory also is not logically possible without this kind of (prior) experience,
because (memory) is essentially the absence of forgetfulness of something
The word here is ‘abodha’, which literally means ‘not-consciousness’.
Read with Jayaratha sarvadaiva for sarvatraiva.

The ‘denial’ (apoha) to which this verse refers is a cognitive process whereby a
particular object perceived by the senses, or even imagined, is identified by ‘denyingʼ

that it is anything else. Buddhist logicians originally formulated this concept in order to
account for the specificity of entities which they maintain have no nature of their own
and so cannot be distinguished simply on the basis that they are different things. From

the perspective of the philosophy of Recognition (Pratyabhijña), it is not applicable to

the light of consciousness that shines everywhere as everything at all times. All that

needs to be done is to recognise that the One Light exists and that it illumines the
manifestation of all things.
anadhigatavīṣayaṁ Npramāṇamajñātārthaprakāśo vā. This statement, which is
probably drawn from a Buddhist text, is discussed in ĪPVV vol. 1, p. 63. It is quoted
again below ad 1/180cd-181ab and in the ad 4/81cd-83.

The light of consciousness irrefutably precedes all knowledge.

TANTRĀLOKA

previously experienced,√ and there is no experience of a previous time that is

devoid of the light (of manifestation) (simply) because the experience of that is

essentially the light (of manifestation which is consciousness), and so it is itself
(that) Light (of consciousness). So how can it not exist previously also? Thus,
the proof (of the existence of the Light of consciousness) does not depend on
(any) means of knowledge, because it is proved to exist right from the start

(ādisiddha), as it shines at all times. Again, in accord with the principle (nīti)

that ‘the light (of consciousness) is the subject (pramātṛ) that illumines (all
things), it is Siva, the Supreme Lord, Who is the supreme subject. So it was
rightly said that: ‘the supreme reality (paraṁ tattvam) of the object (of

perception) is Śiva, Who is Light.

This definition of memory is found in YSū 1/11. anubhūtaviṣayāsaṁpramoṣaḥ
smṛtiḥ. Abhinava explains from the Pratyabhijñā point of view:

pūrvaprakāśitavīmṛṣṭatvenaiva prakāśo yo vimarśane vārtamānike antarvartī
samarthitaḥ, sa eva anubhūtasya viṣayasya asaṁpramoṣo ‘napahāraḥ ucyate |
anubhavo Śtīto hi atra prakāśabhāvena viṣayasya uktaḥ, asaṁpramoṣaśca

vārtamānikaṁ (p. 23) tathāparāmarśanam |

‘it is established that the light (that shines) in the present act of reflective
awareness is present within it as the reflection on what has been previously illumined. It
is this alone, namely, the lack of forgetfulness of an object experienced (in the past) that
is said to be (its) retention (anapahāra) (in experience). It is said that the manifest state
here of an object is a past experience and the lack of forgetfulness is the reflective

awareness of its being such at the present time. ĪPVV 2 p. 22-23
Memory also requires previous experience as its basis. There is nothing prior to

experience (that is, the Light of consciousness) that can come to be known by any
means whatsoever, for they are all based on experience. Cf. ĪP 1/1/2: “When the
cognizer and the agent, who is one's own Self and Maheśvara, is proved to exist right
from the beginning (of any perception for it to be possible), what intelligent person can
(ever) deny or establish (its existence)?”
After quoting this verse, Maheśvarānanda (in MM p. 16) writes: gāṅgo hi
pravāhaḥ śaityaprasādādyanekaguṇotkarṣād antarbahiṣṭāpāpahārapravīṇo bhavati |
(p. 17) tatraiva sarvāṅgīṇāplavapūrvakam aghamarṣaṇādyavasthāsu ko nāma naras
tṛṣitah syāt | na kaścid api tathā syād iti yāvat | pipāsety anena
gaṅgāsrotonimagnasyāpi yadi kaṣyacit salilapānecchā, kas tatra pātuṁ pratyīūha iti

pratyāyayatā dārṣṭāntike "pi sthale viśvavyavahāranibanáhanaṁ parameśvaraṁ prati
pramāṇajijñāsāyāṁ pratyakṣādīni sarvāṇy api pramāṇāni sambhavanti, na punar eṣām
atra kācid apekṣety udbhāvyate |

‘The flow of (the river) Ganges removes both outer and inner heat by virtue of
the excellence of its many qualities such as coolness and purity. First plunging with all
one’s body there when in states such as those that efface sin, what man could be thirsty?
None at all could be so! If one who is immersed in the current of the Ganges is thirsty
and desires to drink, what obstacle could there be (to prevent him) from drinking? Now

taking this validatory experience as an example, desiring to inquire into (the nature of)

valid means of knowledge, (we observe) that all the means of knowledge, including
direct perception and the rest, (arise and) are possible (saṁṅbhavanti) with respect to the
Supreme Lord who holds together all the activities of daily life. Nor indeed does one

observe that here (in this case) they are dependent at all (on anything in any way. Rather
they are validated by the Supreme Lord Himself).”

Above, 1/52ab, also quoted above in TĀv ad 1/26 and below ad 10/55cd-56ab.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Nor is it just that when that is proved (to be so) (siddha), the (various)

means of knowledge are of no use; rather, on the contrary, the proof (siddhi) (of

their validity also) depends on that. Thus, he says:

Tīrātṁ ā sttā: a ũ aāat . uyy1]
pramāṇāny api vastānāṁ jīvitaṁ yāni tanvate |
teṣām api paro jīvaḥ sa eva parameśvaraḥ || 55 ||

The (many) means of knowledge give life to all things (vastu)

(because it is by means of them that they appear to the sentient subject),

while the supreme living essence (jīva) of those (means) also is that same

Supreme Lord (Himself Who is the true identity of the perceiver).

(One may object that) here (according to your view,) entities (vastu)
such as ‘blue’ or ‘yellow” are, independently of their manifest form (prakāśa —

ḷ Verses 1/54-55 are quoted below in TĀv ad 10/116cd-117ab. Abhinava explains in

his Tantrocc
‘(Objection:) surely if this God is of the nature of Light, how is it that
his ignorance is not of the nature of Light? Or (if it is), how can it cease? It is said (in

response to this question): ‘The Self is Śiva, who is free and whose body is Light’. This
Supreme Lord is free, because once he has obscured his own nature, he makes it

manifest (again). And his nature is Light. `~~Thus, if he were not to shine in any one
aspect, that (aspect) would be unmanifest (and so would He), whereas He shines with all

his being (as the nature of all things) (sarvātmanā), and so is manifestation itself
(prakāśatā lit. ‘luminosity°). (And this) manifestation of (Śiva’s) own nature is His
freedom.”
Maheśvarānanda quotes this verse in the MM (p. 16, see previous note). He
links it to the following references:
‘What is the use of (any) means of knowledge which is (an ever) new
manifestation (navābhāsa) with regards to (this) ancient perceiver whose nature is
always manifest (sarvadābhāta) and is inherent in every cognition?’ (IP 2/3/15)
‘O dear one, who can know the knower? (Bṛhadāranyakopaṇiṣad 415/15)

‘Just as he who tries to cross over the shade of his own head with his feet, his
head could (never) be in the place where (his) feet are, so is it with this energy of the
Point (i.e. the power of subjectivity). According to Kṣemarāja, who quotes this verse in
his commentary on the first Śivasūtra, it is drawn from the Trikaḥr̥daya. Abhinava

quotes it in the PTy (p. 171), saying it is from the Tantrasāra. He returns repeatedly to

this image of subjectivity. For example, in MVV 1/912 he says: palāyate hi cit sā ced
vyavacicchedayiṣyate | nijottamāṅgacchāyeva svapadāakramaṇakrame || ‘If one wishes
to delimit consciousness, it flees (from all attempts to reach it), like the shade of one’s
own head when one’s own feet (seek) to cross into it.’ Also, IPVv, 1, p. 66: vicāritā
pūrvasiddha evānyathā vicārāyogād ity evam ātmā vicāryamāno’ pi svaśiraśchāyeva
pramāṇapadākramaṇād dūram apakrāmati | ‘The one who reflects (on the nature of
something) is established (to exist) prior (to his examination of the object), otherwise
(that) examination would not be possible. Thus, even if the Self is the object of
examination, (it is not exhausted in this objectivity, but) like the shade of one’s own

head recedes far away due to the assault (on it) by the plane of the means of knowledge

(that seeks to grasp it).’

TANTRĀLOKA

‘ligh’), in themselves or with respect to one another, not different (from one
another from the point of view of) their own essential nature (because they are
all just the light of consciousness). (Thus it follows that) ‘blue’ is not ‘blue’ in
its own essential nature nor is ‘yellow’, ‘yellow’. (So) if ‘blue’ were to be

‘yellowʼ in its own essential nature, or ‘yellow’ ‘blue’, that would not entail any

contradiction at all. Now if (you were to say that) just as something manifests,
s0 should it be established in itself, and so (for that reason) blue is not yellow

and yellow is not blue, (our reply would be that) in this way then nothing would

be said about their difference (viśeṣa) within themselves. (To these objections,

our reply is that) however, (this difference) does manifest (lit. ‘shine’), and so it

is the Light itself that is their (specific) nature (rāpa)' (and the difference

between them). (Thus,) because (the Light of consciousness) is associated with

the establishment of each fixed, specific nature (of every single thing), it may
impart ‘life’ (to all manifest forms equally, without distinction) in such a way
that (the perception that) ‘this is blue’ and ‘this is yellow’ can be accomplished
(siddhyet).
Again, that (light of consciousness), coloured (adventitiously) by (the

manifest form of) ‘blue’ etc., assuming a (particular) fixed form as its support,
should be referred to as the means of knowledge. Moreover, nothing else is
required in order to prove its own existence (svātmasiddhi), both because its
natṭure is the light (of consciousness and manifestation) and because the light
illumines both itself (as subjective consciousness) and the other (objective

consciousness which it makes manifest). (But) even though this light (of
consciousness) is such, it would not be the locus of the stable foundation of an
entity or of itself (as the subject) within (the luminous) nature of the light (of

consciousness). In this way even ‘blue’ would not be ‘blue’ — such would be the
consequence. Therefore, in order to establish the existence (siddhi) of its own
manifest nature (lit. ‘luminosity’) (as the subject) and that of (everything) else

(as the object), one must accept (the existence) of a light (that illumines) that
(means of knowledge) also, the nature of which is the reflective awareness of ‘I

consciousness, which is its life, so that everything may be established (to be
what it is). As is said (in the Ajaḍapramātṛ-siddhi);:
l Read with the MSs iti prakāśa for ii iti prakāśa.

One could also translate if we accept the reading of the printed text: ‘thus
manifestation (lit. ‘light’) alone (shining) as this and that (iti iti prakāśa) is their nature
(rūpa) which, because it is not constrained to assume any particular fixed form, . . . may

impart ‘life . . .

The experiences of blue and yellow differ because the light of knowledge shines
variously in accord with its object. If this were not so, blue would appear as yellow or

vice versa. However, they are fundamentally the same in that they are equally

manifestations within experience which occur harmoniously and are regulated and
conditioned by empirical laws. They shine by virtue of that Light, whereas the Light
itself is self-reflective, and so does not require any other Light to illumine it. Otherwise,

if it did, this would entail an inevitable infinite regress insofar as that Light would
require another to illumine it and that another and so on. The perceiver is the final place

of rest (viśrantiṣṭhāna) of the act of perception, where the manifestation (‘ligh’) of the
object becomes reflective awareness (vimarśa). The perceiver becomes conscious of

himself, of his being the ‘light’ of the perception (‘illumination’ of the object). The

illumination of the object — its perception — presupposes a light into which it enters, a


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

‘the repose of the light (of consciousness) within its own nature is said

to be the state of (pure) ‘I’ (consciousness) (ahaṁbhāva).

And that itself is Śiva, the Supreme Lord Who is the Supreme Light,

and so it is said that ‘while the supreme living essence (jīva) of those (means)

also is that same Supreme Lord (Himself, Who is the true identity of the

perceiver)ʼ.

As that (Light) is proved to exist (a priori) right from the start

(ādisiddha) not only can (any) means of knowledge not do anything (to prove
its existence) (sādhaka), nor can (they) disprove (its existence) (bādhaka)
either. Thus, he says:
light which is not its own but belongs to the subject. The stable, established state of the

subject ‘precedes’ as an a priori condition of knowledge, and so can never be grasped as

an object. To try and do so would be like trying to jump over the shade of one’s own
head. Thus, it is proved ‘right from the start’. The pure subjectivity of consciousness

which escapes, because it ‘precedesʼ, objectification in this way, is therefore

unconditioned, and so is the consciousness of Deity itself. See Torella 2002: 85-86.

APS 22cd. Also quoted below in TĀv ad 3/203cd-204ab, 3/221cd-223ab, and
6/238cd-239ab (238). Abhinava himself refers to this line in TĀ 5/61cd-62ab.

The term ‘siddhi’, which literally means ‘accomplishment’, has more than one
application in this context. For one thing, it is used to mean the proof of a proposition.

The right application of a valid means of knowledge to ascertain the nature of something
leads to its siddhi — that is, ‘accomplishment’, ‘proof, or ‘correct ascertainment’. For

example, when we see smoke on a hill, we can infer that there is fire. This is because
there is an invariable concomitance between smoke and fire, i.e. where there is smoke
there must be fire. Thus, the existence of the fire on the hill is established (siddha), and

its valid proof is the siddhi — proof — of the existence of smoke on the hill. When an

object is perceived by the senses and its nature correctly apprehended through the

processes of perception, which is also considered to be a valid means of knowledge, this
is its siddhi. The object is siddha — established to be what it is. The term used in this
sense operates equally well in relation to the accomplishment of a goal. The production

of a jar from a lump of clay, for example, is its siddhi ~ accomplishment. The
accomplishment of anything — whether it be an action or right knowledge — presupposes,
according to this view, the existence of the agent of the act and the knower. Now, the

subject - who is thus both agent and perceiver — is the same Light of consciousness that

illumines and shines as the object, but it knows itself as itself, that is, as a subject, rather
than as something else, that is, an object. The reflective awareness which is inherent in

the Light of consciousness as its most essential attribute and power can thus be directed
outwards, as it were, as the reflective awareness of ‘this’ (idaṁvimarśa), or inwards as

the reflective awareness of ‘I’ (ahaṁvimarśa). The final resting place (viśāntiṣṭhāna) of
the former is the latter, just as it is its beginning. The same can be said mutatis mutandis

of action. Activity proceeds from the agent, and when completed comes to rest in him
again. Just as the two — knowledge (that is perception etc.) and action - go together as
aspects of the activity of consciousness, so does the object as that of knowledge and
action, as well as the subject as the perceiver and the agent. The subject is the basis,

resting place and source of the other aspects. Ultimately, it is consciousness itself. Thus
it is siddha (i.e. established, proved, and accomplished) right from the start and is the
basis and ultimate cause of the siddhi (i.e. establishment, proof and accomplishment) of

the cognition and action that follow after. Perception and action of the individual

perceiver and agent of consciousness ‘contracted down’ to the individual level is the

microcosmic equivalent of the universal perception and activity of macrocosmic

TANTRĀLOKA

qdīṁgaācaīrrraī fē t |
hiECIVĪĒ GĒISĀEIĪ

sarvāpahnavaheyākadharmāpy evaṁ hi vartate |
jñānam ātmārtham ity etan neti māṁ prati bhāsate || 56 ||

It happens in this way even to one whose capricious nature is to

deny everything, namely that (he experiences that): “this negation of
knowledge, oneself and the object manifests to me.”
He whose ‘nature’ is ‘capriciousʼ, and denies, that is, refutes (the
existence of) ‘everything’, that is, the knower, knowledge and the object of
knowledge, is the Buddhist. The Mādhyamika (Buddhiṣṭts) maintain that (all)
three do not exist. The Yogācāra (Buddhists) maintain that the knower and the

object of knowledge do not exist. The Vaibhāṣika (Buddhiṣṭs) maintain that
(only) the knower does not exist. He also (experiences) ‘the negation of
knowledge, oneself and the object’ (as:) ‘it manifests to me’, that is, to the
one who is reasoning (as to whether they exist or not). This is because (his
negation of their existence) is essentially a state of awareness (saṅvedana)
(within consciousness). The denial (of their existence) is and abides as a
consciousness that expands out, through and as, its ‘contracted’ equivalent. This

happens holistically; that is to say, every single part, however tiny, is the whole.
Consciousness is thus not just an aggregate of (its countless ‘contracted’) parts, it is

their essential nature. As all this is established, proved and accomplished — siddha —
right from the start, as consciousness which is Śiva Himself. Utpaladeva appropriately

commences his exposition of the Doctrine of Recognition (IP 1/1/2) by saying:

‘What intelligent (sentient) being could ever refute or prove (the existence) of
the agent, the perceiver, his own Self, which is the Great Lord, proved to exist right
from the start (ādisiddha)
Utpaladeva himself explains: “Every being’s own nature is the basis of the

(proof, accomplishment and) establishment (siddhi) of all existing things. It has
encompassed (within itself) the establishment (proof and accomplishment) (siddhi) (of
everything), for otherwise the accomplishment of each and every single thing would be

(logically) impossible. It is its own Light and its nature, one with the subject, proved

(and established right from the start) prior (to any cognition or action) (pārvasiddha), is
(most) ancient, and (possesses all) knowledge and action. Proved (to be such) by one’s
own self-awareness itself (svasaṁvedanasiddha), it is the lordship (that is, sovereign
mastery) (aiśvarya) (of both individual consciousness to know and act in its limited way
and of universal consciousness in its unlimited way by virtue of which it is Deity). Thus,
(the effort) to prove (the existence) of the Lord and (so too to) refute it, is the exertion of

fools.

Kṣemarāja begins his exposition of the Heart of Recognition
(pratyabhijñāhṛdaya) in the same way, declaring that ‘consciousness, which is
(perfectly) free, is the cause of the accomplishment (siddhi) of everything’. The reader

is referred to his commentary, which covers succinctly and in depth the points
mentioned here.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


(personal) conviction (pratīti). This is the meaning. Thus, the (very) refutation

of (the existence of) oneself (that is, the subject) etc., or means to establish it

(sādhana) (then entails) that the one who is contending (this view), (whose
existence) is necessarily implied (ākṣipta) in (the presentation of his) prior
contention (pūrvakoṭi), is proved to exist (siddha). It would not be possible to
prove the existence of anything (or the correctness of any view) without the
existence of the one who is (attempting) to prove it. And that one is Śiva
Himself, who is the Supreme Lord, ultimate reality (paramārtha), and the Light
(of consciousness), which is proved to exist by itself (svataḥ siddha) (without
need of ulterior independent proof).
Thuṣ there (in that case) also, the Buddhiṣṭ’s (effort) to conceive (any

valid) means of knowledge (pramāṇa) (to establish his view) is useless. Thus,
he says:

āTTā JHIPITIJTATĀāĪTT |I 491|
apahnutau sādhane vā vastūnām ādyam īdrśam |
yat tatra ke pramāṇānām upapattyupayogite || 57 ||

(Insofar as) the negation or affirmation of (the existence of) things

is preceded (a priori) by such a one (who does it), how can the reasons

(based on any of the) means of knowledge be applicable there (to him)?°°


(The

negation

or affirmation of)

‘thingsʼ,

that

is,

the knower,

knowledge or object of knowledge, is ‘preceded’, because it is proved a priori,
by ‘such a one’ʼ, that is, the supreme perceiver (parapramātṛ), (no means of
knowledge is applicable) ‘there’ to the perceiver whose existence is proved (a

priori) right from the start (ādisiddha). It is said that the means of knowledge

Formal philosophical disputation in India begins with the presentation of the

opponent’s view. Thus, it is called the ‘prior contention’ or ‘view’ (pārvakoṭi /
pūrvapakṣa). The response to the opponent’s view is the ‘subsequent contention’ or
‘view’ (uttarakoṭi uttarapakṣa). Jayaratha is saying that his Buddhist opponent, who
denies the existence of the Self etc., is proved to be wrong by the very fact that he puts

forwards this view, as he could not do so if consciousness in its tripartite manifestation
as subject, object and means of knowledge, did not exist.

Another, freer, translation could be: ‘(Insofar as) the negation or affirmation of (the

existence of) anything (including that of the sentient subject) is such that, a priori, (the

negator must participate in it), how can any means of knowledge be justifiably

applicable there (to him)?’ Cf. ĪP 1/1/2 quoted above ad 1/55; cf. also ĪP 2/3/15-16
(Torella 2002: 172-173).

There are three aspects (koṭi) that constitute any noetic event, the subject (pramātṛ),

means (pramāṇa) and object of knowledge (prameya). In this context, the ‘means of

knowledge’ is the means that proves (pramāṇa) the proposition which is to be proved
(prameya), and is applied by the one who is engaged in proving it (pramātr). The play

on words here is clear. In this perspective, perception is the means applied by the
perceiver by which he proves the existence of the object of perception and its nature to

TANTRĀLOKA

is indeed that which possesses the (correct) knowledge (pramāvat) of the object
of knowledge. Again, the object of knowledge is that which is to be reflected
upon as objective (idantāvimṛśyam), and the establishment (of its existence and

true nature) (siddhi) depends on the light (of the consciousness of the perceiver)
that is separate (from it). And the nature of the perceiver is not such (as that of

the object) that it can be determined specifically (paricchedya)™ by a means of
knowledge. (The perceiver) is engaged in determining etc. (the specific nature
of) an entity (arthapariccheda), and because it is its own light, it is not separate
from the Light (of consciousness), nor can (the perceiver) be perceived

objectively (idantāvimṛśya), because it consists (essentially) of the reflective
awareness of ‘I’ (consciousness). If that were to be the object of a means of
knowledge, then it would be perceivable (bhāvya) by another perceiver
(engaged) in the act of perception (pramitikriyā), and there (in that case) by
another also (and so on). Thus, there would be an infinite regress (anavasthāna)

(which would make perception impossible). Thus here (in this case), there is no
good reason at all for the functioning (pravṛtti) of (any) means of knowledge (to
prove the existence of the perceiver). What is said in the teaching concerning
meditation (bhāvanopadeśa) and the like, for example, ‘this Self has shone forth
(just) once, is (just a manner of speaking that accords with common) usage

be as itis perceived. The ‘supreme perceiver’ (parapramātṛ) is thus the ultimate identity
of all perceivers engaged in proving or disproving the existence and nature of anything
to be as it is or otherwise, just as he is the essential consciousness, which is the
subjectivity of all perceiving subjects.

1 have tentatively emended prameyaṁ khalu pramiṇvat pramāṇam to prameyasya

pramāvat pramāṇam.

Read -paricchedyaṁ for —paricchedyaḥ.
sakrṛd vibhāto’ yam ātmā A longer version is

Spandasaṅdoha. He introduces it saying that it is a

quoted by Kṣemarāja in his

‘śivasūtra’. Not found in the


Sivasūtra, he probably means to say that it is a brief statement uttered by Śiva. It reads:


‘this Self shines forth but once, it is full (of all things), and so can nowhere be
unmanifest.” (sakṛd vibhāto ‘ayam ātmā pūrṇasyāsya na kvāpy aprakāśanasaṁbhavaḥ).

Quoting the full form,_Abhinava informs us that it is from the unrecovered
Sāraṣvatasaṅgrahasūtra (IPVv 3, p. 23). He explains (ibid. p. 20): “One who knows the

Brahman describes with this dictum the ultimately real perceiver whose sole nature is
the illuminating (Light which shines) constantly, without a break. Its manifestation

(ābhāsa) is not occasional, (as is that of) being and nonbeing. Therefore, there is no
association there with time, nor is there (any) within phenomena in relation to that. This
is the meaning of (this) aphorism.”
A little further ahead (ibid. p. 23), just before he quotes this aphorism to

explain that the Light of consciousness is not absent anywhere, Abhinava quotes a verse
he wrote praising the Light of consciousness:
‘I (Śiva), who bear the beauty of the radiant half-moon, praise the form which

is the illuminator of phenomenal existence, of the ocean of the consciousness, of the

fickle (playful) state of the illumination of the manifestation (of the Light of
consciousness) and its absence, pertaining to the variegated (individual) Self and the
body of its own luminous body (vapuṣ), free of the sequence (of phenomenal
manifestation) (which is such) by virtue of (its inherent) freedom.”


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


(vyavahāra) in terms of objectivity. This is not literally so (na vāstava), because
there (in that case), there is no direct experience (of it as an object). (The Self) is

experienced (as if it were an object) because there (in that case, its) subjectivity
is obscured. Let this suffice. This same (point) will be elaborated at each step.

It was also explained previously that (n0) means of knowledge is of any use, as
(the subject) is proved (a priori) right from the start (ādisiddha), and so (the
point) has not been elaborated again (here).
Not only (does) sound reasoning (yukti) (support this view) here,
scripture (does s0) also. Accordingly, he says:

aIṁ ṭqaraaisīā|

aūaī feēra || ucII

fI: |

kāmike tata evoktaṁ heṭuvādavivarjitam |

tasya devātidevasya parāpekṣā na vidyate || 58 ||
parasya tadapekṣatvāt svatantro ‘yam ataḥ sthitaḥ |

Thus, it is said in the Kāmikāgama that (Deity) is free of logical

discussion (hetuvāda). That God Who surpasses the gods does not depend
The sense of saying that ‘the Self has shone forth (just) onceʼ is that the

manifestation of the Self’s true infinite, unconditioned nature is not a temporal event.
Events set in time happen one after another. We measure time in relation to what takes
place previously and subsequently. Consciousness is one, and so when it manifests it

does so ‘just once’. This ‘once’ is not a particular moment, as there is no previous

moment prior to its manifestation and subsequent one after it ceases to do so. This also
implies that a full and perfect manifestation of the pure conscious Self happens ‘just

onceʼ and forever, continuously. The same expression is found in Gauḍapādakārikā
(3/36), with reference to the Brahman. Jayaratha quotes this saying as many as nine
more times in his commentary on 1/66ab (67ab), 1/125-126 (125cd-127ab, 3/129

(128cd-129ab), 4/178cd-180ab, 5/88cd-89 (88-89ab), 8/171cd-175ab (171-174), 9/159,
10/116cd-117ab and 29/80. See also, IPVV vol. 1 p. 55 and vol. 2 p. 262. Abhinava uses
the same expression with reference to the uniqueness of any clearly and certainly
perceived object: “(an entity) known according to its particular nature, that is, fixed by a

firm (and sure) apprehension (of its nature), is one that has manifested (vibhāta)
(clearly). It does not need to be meditated upon again, because it has shone forth once
(and for all) (sakṛd vibhāta).’ PTv p. 38-39
Jayaratha is saying here that this expression is a just a manner of speaking. The

perceiver is not an object. When it is said that ‘it manifests’, that should not be

understood to be in the way in which an object manifests, even if that is an inner object

of meditation. Moreover, the process of manifestation taking place within the expanse of
consciousness of the perceiver, free of thought constructs — including those of space and
the passage of time — takes place in a timeless moment. It is ‘(just) once also in the

sense of ‘all at once’. Cf. below, 10/220cd-222, also Dyczkowski 1987: 82.

This is the common experience of oneself as the body and mind (that is, one could

say, ‘personality). This comes about by the mistaken identification with such things

that, objective by nature, obscure in this way the pure subjectivity of consciousness,
which is totally devoid of any objectivity.

TANTRĀLOKA

on (anything) else (to establish His existence,) because (everything) else
depends on Him, and so He is (always) independent (and free). (58-59ab)

(59-60ab)

‘Thus’, because there (in the case of the perceiver) none of the means

of knowledge are (logically) appropriate and have no application, it is ‘free of
logical discussion’, that is, it is devoid of (any) talk (vāda) of (any) inference
(concerning its nature). Thus, he says: ‘that’ (Supreme God of the gods does
not depend) ‘on (anything) else’ such as a means of knowledge or the like (to

establish His existence), and ‘s0’ because (He) does not depend on anything else

(He is always independent and free).

Just as the means of knowledge do not condition (Him) because, in this

way, He does not depend on (any) other (thing), similarly the objects of
knowledge also (do not do s0). Thus, he says:
Śiva Ubiquitous, Eternal and Omniform

STTJAT]
āTTĪ TTṀTPTJTTJHT: |] .R II
fraaī ṝ a fnvyfṁcī fēaīgfā:. fra.
Rastogi (1987: 281) does not take this to be a direct quotation. But Kṣemarāja took it

to be so. It is not certain that Kṣemarāja had access to the Kāmika, as he invariably only
quotes passages cited by Abhinava; even so, we know that he did take this passage to be

a direct, literal citation from the Kāmika, as he quotes as such in his commentary on NT
7/16, that reads as follows.

yad _ iti

Ṃprathamādhikāranirdiṣṭaparadhāmāīmavīryam,

svarāpam

iti

sarvasya,
svasaṁvedyaṁ
svaprakāśam
na
tu
svasaṁvedanānyapramāṇaprameyam,
tasya devātidevasya parāpekṣā na vidyate |
parasya tadapekṣatvāt svatantro ‘yam ataḥ sthitaḥ |I”
iti kāmikoktanītyā. aṣya bhagavataḥ pramāṇāgocaravāt ata eva svatantrātmaṇy
avatiṣṭhate na tv anyatra tadviviktasyānyasyābhāvāt pratyutānyadviśvaṁ tadvyāptatvāt
tanmayam eva saṁbhavati

‘What was taught in the first chapter (of the Netratantra) to be the supreme

(luminous) abode’s own vitality, (that) is the ‘own nature ‘(svarūpa) of everything,
because no specification has been made (as to whose ‘own nature’ it is). (Moreover,) it

is its own object of awareness and is self-luminous; it is not an object of a means of
knowledge that is other than its own self-awareness.
‘That God Who surpasses the gods does not depend on (any) other (thing),
because (every) other (thing) depends on Him, and so He is (always) independent (and

free).

In accord with this principle (nīti), as stated in the Kāmika, the Lord is not in
the field of (any) means of knowledge, and so abides within his own independent nature,
certainly not elsewhere, because there is (nothing) else separate from that; on the

contrary, all else (that may come into existence) can (only) possibly do so (sarbhavati)
because it is pervaded by it, and so is of that very same nature.’
See above, note 1, 249 and Kāmikāgama entry in Appendix concerning cited
texts.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


anapekṣasya vaśino deśakālākṛtikramāḥ |) 59 ||
niyatā neti sa vibhur nityo viśvākṛtiḥ śivaḥ |
For one who, independent and the master (of all things, transcends

them,) spatial, temporal and formal processes are not restricted (niyata) (by

Karma and natural law), and so He is Śiva Who is ubiquitous, eternal and
omniform. (59cd-60ab) (60cd-61ab)

(Śiva is) ‘master (of all things), that is, free. By means of the
specifications (concerning Him), a reason (is supplied as to why that is s0). Here
(in this case) also, space, time and form cannot divide up Śiva, Who is the Light

(of consciousness) and independent of (all) else, because (space and the rest) are

conditioned (upahata) by thought constructs based on unity and diversity
(bhedābheda). So (he says that they are) ‘not restricted’. Thus (Abhinava)

says̃ that (Śiva) is such (by statīng that He is): ‘ubiquitous, eternal and

omniformʼ. (He is) ‘ubiquitous’ because (He is) not divided up by space. (He
is) ‘eternal’ʼ because time that divides (events) up into past (present and future)
has fallen away. (He is) ‘omniformʼ because (He) pours out the wonderful
variety of forms, sentient and insentient etc.
This is expanded on further (prapañcayati)

vibhutvāt sarvago nityabhāvād ādyantavarjitaḥ | 60 ||
viśvākṛtitvāc cidacittadvaicitryāvabhāsakaḥ |

By virtue of His ubiquity, He is all-pervading. As he is eternal, He is

free of beginning and end. As He is omniform, He manifests the wonderful
variety of things, both sentient and insentient. (60cd-61ab) (61cd-62ab)

Śiva is consciousness, which is eternal, ubiquitous and omniform, that is, unaffected
by time (because it is always the same), undivided by space (because it is everywhere),
and without a fixed form (because everything is a form of the Light of consciousness).

Perceptions of time, space and form are not a direct experience of reality, that is,

consciousness just as it is (i.e. as described). They are thought constructs formed from a

perception of the continuity of manifestations of consciousness on the one hand, and on

the other, that of their difference from one another. The same is the case with space —

there is a unity of space and difference of location. So too forms, insofar as they are all
equally manifestations and yet also different from one another. See above, comm. and
note to 1/52.

Jayaratha, it seems, understands that this and the following verse are a gloss on the
previous one drawn from the Kāmikāgama. However, as he did not have a copy of it, it
is quite possible that he was mistaken. If so, these two verses are also drawn from there.

TANTRĀḶLOKA

says:

Thus it is said in the Āgamas that he has many forms. Accordingly, he

ūīNeEEtkkEcīitiīatt| cṇṬRAḤI
at faīrēr aaāiīṝ.
ḷē-7 - tftār-raṁcafīra: ṝzan.
ftīa -ad 1 =zu
tato ʻsya bahurūpatvam uktaṁ dīkṣottarādike || 61 ||

bhuvanaṁ vigraho jyotiḥ khaṁ śabdo mantra eva ca |
bindunādādisaṁbhinnaḥ ṣaḍvidhaḥ śiva ucyate || 62 |

Thus, His pluriform nature is taught, for example, in the
Diīkṣottara. Śiva, conjoined with the Point (bindu) and Sound (nāda) etc.,
is said to be of six kinds, (as World (bhuvana), (Iconic) Form (vigraha),

Light (jyotiṣ), Space (kha), (Unstruck) Sound (śabda) and Mantra. (61cd-

62) (62cd-63)

TĀ 1/61cd-62 (62cd-63) is based on Dīkṣottara 2/2cd-3ab. See Somadeva 2004: 257.
There are manuscripts of this text in the Institut Français d'Indologie in Pondicherry

(transcripts no. 17B, 127 and 150). It is the second half of the Niḥśvāsakārikā (see
Sanderson, 1990: 75). The Dīkṣottara is transmitted in South Indian manuscripts as the
last part of the Niśvāsakārikā. Thīs, in its turn, appears to be the fifth and last part
(sūtra) of the Niśvāsatattvakārikā. As Sanderson points out (1996c: 24), in the last verse

of the Guhyasūtra (with which the Nepalese manuscript of the Niśvāsatattvakārikā
ends): Śiva invites Devī to ask him to g80 on and teach the fifth sūrra, the

kārikā. Although it is probable that this is a much latter addition to the sātras of

the Niśvāsatattvakārikā, which were also probably composed at various times, the
Dīkṣottara recovered in the South and found amongst the transcripts of the IFP is the
one known to Abhinavagupta. He quotes it as many as thirteen times.’ See also below,
2/9, 51149ab (5/148), 8/9, 15/461-462ab (458cd-459), 17/97, 18/11, 1921, 21/61, 24/4
and 17, 28/65, and 29/243. Concerning the Dīkṣottara, see the Appendix dealing with

the sources under this heading.

The verse (edited by Somadeva 2004: 257) reads in the Dīkṣottara 2/2cd-3ab:


śabdavyoṃmnī tathā jyotir vigraho bhuvanaṁ tathā ||

mantramārtiṣ tu paramaḥ ṣaḍvidhas tu śivo ʻvyayaḥ |
‘Imperishable Śiva is six-fold as Word, Space, Light, Form, World-order, and

Mantra-form.

Kṣemarāja quotes this verse in the SvTu ad 4/270cd to establish that the

bhuvanas, as are the other five, are essentially Śiva by nature. It is clear from

Jayaratha’s explanation of the lines quoted by Abhinava from the Dīkṣottara that he did
not have the text before him, as Sanderson has pointed out (Somadeva 2004: 262 n. 40).
He did, however, have the Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha, the SvT and MV, all of which
he quotes. Jayaratha bases his explanation for the most part on the SYT which, with

respect to the other two sources, is in actual fact the furthest from the explanation the
Dīkṣotara itself supplies. It would have been better had Jayaratha chosen the
explanation given by the MV, but it is not clear and very brief. The sequence of the six
forms of Śiva differs in each of these presentations and none coincide with that noted in
the TĀ. These are: 1) Dīkṣottara: Word, Space, Light, Form, World-order, and Mantra-


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


form. 2) SvāBhu: the Point (bindu), Sound (nāda) and Space (vyoman), Mantra, Worldorder (bhuvana), and Form (vigraha). 3) MV: Space, Form, the Point, Letter, World-

orders and Path (adhvan). 4) TĀ: World (bhuvana), Form (vigraha), Light (jyotiṣ),

Space (kha), Word (śabda) (of Unstruck Sound) and Mantra. It is hard to say whether
Abhinava eṣtablished this sequence with a specific purpose in mind. Anyway, for the
sake of clarity, the following explanation of the six is drawn primariḷy from the

Dīkṣottara, which is the source he refers to specifically, and is compared with the brief
account in the MV. The order of presentation is the one suggested by Abhinava.

The following is my edition and translation of Chapter Two of the Dikṣottara,

where this is explained. It is based on IFP Transcript TOO17B from folio 795 to the end,

inputted under my supervision for Muktabodha’s digital library. The Dīkṣottara of the

Niśvāsakārikā is the fifth section of the Niśvāsatattvasaṁhitā:

deva uvāca-

Śṛṇu devi pravakṣyāmi sādhakānāṁ hitāvaham |
yena vijñātamātreṇa vidhimuktaṁ labhed dhṛvam |I I |]
saḍvidhas tu śivo jñeyo yoginā sumahātmanā | p. 806)

śabdavyomatayā jyotiḥ vigraho bhuvanas tathā |I 2 ||

mantramūrtis tu paramaḥ ṣaḍvidhas tu śivo 'vyayaḥ |
mantramūrtiṁ viditvã tu mantrasiddhim avãpnuyãt || 3 I|
bhuvaneśatvam āpnoti bhuvanāsaktamānasaḥ |

‘The god s
Listen, O goddess, I will tell (you) what is of benefit for adepts (sādhaka), by
just knowing which one certainly becomes free of (having to perform) the prescribed

procedures. The yogi who is a beautiful and great soul should know Śiva, who is of six

kinds. (1-2ab)
Imperishable Śiva is of six kinds as Sound, Space, Light, Form, World, and
Mantra-form. Once the Mantra-form is known, one attains accomplishment in Mantra.
He whose mind is intent on a world attains lordship over (that) world. (2cd-4ab)
brahmādīnāṁ surendrāṇāṁ sādhane vigrahaṁ smaret | 4 ||
yoginām adhipatyarthaṁ jyotistho yogam abhyaset |
Śśabdatatve pare līnaḥ śabdāntargatamānasaḥ || 5 II
parameśākhyam āpnoti śabdāt sarvārthasiddhaye |

He should recollect the (iconic) Form of the Brahmā and the other lords of the

gods in the course of (his yogic) practice in order to become the lord of (all) yogis.
Established in the Light, he should practice Yoga.

He whose mind is present within Sound and is merged within the supreme

principle of Sound attains, by virtue of the Sound, the one called the Supreme Lord in
order to accomplish all goals. (4cd-6ab)
tasyātītaṁ paraṁ devi śaktivyoma prakīrtitam || 6 ||
tasya dhyānād bhavet siddhiḥ muktiś caiva na saṁśayaḥ p. 807)

vigraho bhuvano jyotiḥ śabdo vyoma tathaiva ca l|7 l

ete paraprakāśaś tu śivadhyānaparaś śivaḥ |
Śivam evaṁ vidhaṁ
jñātvā sādhakas tu samāhitaḥ || 8 II
prāpnoti vividhāṁ siddhiṁ muktiñ caiva na saṁśayaḥ |

Beyond it, O goddess, is the supreme, said to be the Space of Power. By

meditating on it, there is, without a doubt, both accomplishment and liberation. (6cd7ab)

TANTRĀLOKA

Form, World, Light, Sound and Space — these are the supreme light, Śiva, who

is intent on contemplating Śiva. Once the attentive adept has known Śiva, who is like

this, he attains, without a doubt, many kinds of accomplishment and liberation. (Jcd9ab)
Mantra-form
mantramāūrtiparaṁ jñātvā siddáhiṁ muktim āpnuyāt || 9 ||
japahomārcanādhyānāt (jape-) siddhayaś ca yathārthataḥ |
OŌnce knowing what is beyond the Mantra-form, he attains accomplishment and
liberation. By repeating Mantra, offering oblation, worshipping and contemplation (he
atṭains) accomplishments as desired. (9cd-10ab)

Śiva's World
bhuyanan tu bhuvanākāraṁṅ brahmāṇḍādi yathākramam || 10 |l
nānāratmamayaṁ divyam anaupamyaguṇānvitam |
indranīlamahānīḷaiḥ rājataiś ca vibhūṣitam || 1 1 |I
padmarāgamayastaṁbhaiḥ nānāratnopaśobhitam | p. 808)
divyasṛggandhavastrāḍhyaṁ divyaiśvaryasamanvitam || 12 ||
bhuvanaṁ devadevasya jñātvā tallayam āpnuyāt |
The world-order has the form of a world-order such as the Egg of Brahmā and

the like in due order (within the hierarchy of world-orders). Made of many gems, it is
divine and possesses incomparable qualities. 1t is adorned with great blue sapphires,
pillars made of rubies, and further adorned with many (kinds of) gems, it is rich with

divine garlands, scents and clothes, and endowed with divine sovereignty — once
knowing the world-order of the God of the gods, one attains merger into that. (10cd-

13ab)

Śiva’s Iconic Form
vigrahaṁ vigrahākāraṁ śivavarṇādilakṣaṇam || 13 ||
Śaśāṇkārdhadhanaṁ tryakṣaṁ nāgayajñopavītinam |

Śūnyahastaṁ vr̥ṣārūḍham umādehārdhasaṅyutam || 14 ||
Śśaṇkhakuṇḍendudhavalaṁ sahasrādityavarcasam |
vigrahaṁ devadevasya sarvakāmārthasādhanam || 15 |I

Form (vigraha) has the form of (Śiva’s) icon (vigraha) which is characterized
by Śiva’s colour etc. (He bears) the crescent moon (to the side of the head). (He has)
three eyes, a snake for a sacred thread, there is nothing in (his) hands, he is mounted on
a bull, and Uma is half his body. He is white like a conch, Kunda flower and the moon,
has the radiance of a thousand suns. (Such is) the (iconic) form of the God of the gods,
which is the means to (the attainment) of the objects of all (one’s) desires. (13cd-15)
sādhanaṁ sarvamantrāṇāṁ bhūmyarthe ca smaret sadā |
ḹyotidhyānāt sadā yogī yogasidáhim avāpnuyāt 16 |
aṇimādiguṇaiśvaryaṁ yogīkrīdādilakṣaṇam | p.809)
vyālākāram anākāraṁ vyomavyāpī paraś śivaḥ l| 17 |I


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Itis the means (sādhana) to accomplishing all Mantras. One should recollect it
always in order to attain (Śiva’s) world. By contemplating (Śiva’s) Light constantly, the
yogi attains the accomplishments of yoga. (These include) the powers to make oneself

small at will and the other (forms of) mastery that characterize the yogi’s sport etc. The

form of a tiger (vyāla) and no form (at all), (such is) Supreme Śiva who pervades Space
(vyomavyāpin). (16-17)

Śiva as Pervasive Space
sarvavyāpinam īśānaṁ cintayā śivam āpnuyāt |
nirguṇaṁ sāñjanātītaṁ grahanakṣatravarjitam || 18 ||
śuddhasphaṭikasaṇkāśaṁ paraṁ vyoma vicintayet |

By reflecting on the Lord (iśāna) who is all-pervasive, one attains Śiva. One
should think of the supreme Space as devoid of (phenomenal) qualities, beyond stain,
free of planets and constellations and (transparent) like pure crystal. (18-19ab)

Sound
vyomalīnamanāḥ samyak vyomastho vyomatanmayaḥ |l 19 ||
paraṁ mokṣaṃ avāpnoti yatra śabde layaṁ gataḥ |
Śśabdadhyānāt paro mokṣaḥ siddhayaś ca na saṁśayaḥ || 20 ||
tasmāt sarvaprayatnena śabdadhyānaṁ samāśrayet |

vāmapārśve iḍā tasya ciciṇīśabdam uttamam || 21 ||

prākr̥taṁ nāma caitad dhi sthūlaś ca parikīrtitaḥ | p. 810)
dakṣiṇeṉa suṣumnā hi ciravākkariṇī smṛtā || 22 |
n nāma cety uktaṁ sūkṣmasya parikīrtitam ḷ
ghaṇṭānādavirāmāntāntāntyamadhye paraṁ smṛtam || 23 ||
nirālaṁbo nirādhāraḥ tad eva paramaṁ padam |
ciravakyante nirālaṁbo nirāśrayaḥ l| 24 ||
ghaṇṭānādavirāmānte śivo 'haṁ yo nirāśrayaḥ |

He whose mind is merged in Space and is properly established in Space, attains

liberation where he dissolves away into Sound. By contemplating Sound, without a

doubt (one attains) liberation and accomplishments. Therefore, one should engage with
all effort in the contemplation of Sound. (I9cd-21ab)
(The channel of the breath called) Iḍā is on its left side. Its most excellent
sound is ‘Cīñcinī’. This is (sound) pertaining to Nature (prākṛta), which is said to be
gross. By (the influence of) the right (channel), suṣumnā is said to make the sound of a
cricket (ciravāk). That is said to pertain to the individual soul (puruṣa) and is said to be
(the sound) of the subtle. (21cd-23ab)
The supreme (form of Sound) is in the centre, at the extremity at the end of the
cessation of the Sound of a bell. Devoid of support and without foundation, that itself is
the supreme plane. (The Sound) devoid of support and without location is at the end of
(the Sound) Ciñciṇī and the cricket, at the end of the cessation of the Sound of the Bell
is the (insight that) “I am Śiva”, which is without location. (23cd-25ab)
hr̥diīṣṭhaṁ mantrasaṁghãtaṁ kr̥tvã mãrtiṁ (mãrti) nyased budhaḥ || 25 |
brahmādibhiḥ kalais tattvaiḥ sarvasiddhikaraḥ (-ra) smṛtaḥ |
sa tu cintayate nityaṁ tatrasthaṁ bindum īśvaram || 26 ||
citrastha īśvaro nādaḥ sa tu sākṣāc chivaḥ (chiva) smṛtaḥ |

TANTRĀLOKA

A ‘world-order” is the particular world-order (in which a fettered soul)
must reside (due to his past Karma), and is the basis (of his experiences of its)

consequences (bhogādhāra). The word form’ denotes by figurative
application, (divine beings) that possess a (particular) form (vigrahin).

Once the wise man has placed the aggregate of Mantras in the Heart, he should
deposit the icon (mirti). (Attended) by the energies and principles consisting of Brahmā
and the rest, it is considered to generate all the accomplishments. He should constantly

reflect on the Point, which is Īśvara, located there. Iśvara is Sound located in the

variegated, and that indeed is considered to be Śiva, directly apparent. (25cd-27ab)
p. 811) haṅsākhyaś caiva binduś ca nādo nādānta eva ca || 27 ||

evaṁ jñātvā bhaven mantrī Śivaḥ sākṣād alepakaḥ |

etat tat paramaṁ guhyam etat tat paramaṁ śivam || 28 |I
(+ etat tat paramaṁ guhyam etat tat paramaṁ padam |)
etat tat paramaṁ jñānam etat tat paramākṣaram || 29 ||

The one called Haṁsa, the Point, Sound and the End of Sound — having known
(this) in this way, the one who recites Mantra is stainless Śiva, directly apparent. That is
the supreme secret, that is supreme Śiva, that is supreme knowledge, and that is the
supreme imperishable (reality). (27cd-29)
nātaḥ parataro dhyeyo nātaḥ parataraṁ śivam |
vidite saṅiyag evaṁ hi mucyate nātra saṁśayaḥ l| 30 ||

sādhakasya vidhir hy eṣā sarvakāmārthasidáhidā |

eteṣāṁ parato devaḥ śabdarūpavivarjitaḥ || 31 ||
vyāpakas sarvatattvānāṁ mayā pūrvam udāhṛtam | p. 812)
taṁ viditvã vimucyante sidhyante nātra saṁśayaḥ || 32 |
iti niśvāsakārikāyāṁ dīkṣottare dvitīyaḥ paṭalaḥ |

There is no higher object of meditation than this. There is no higher Śiva than
this. Once He has been known in this way, (the aspirant) is liberated — there is no doubt
here (about it). This procedure bestows upon the adept the accomplishment of all the
things (he) desires. Beyond them is the God I have taught before, who is devoid of form
and sound and pervades all the reality levels (tattva). Once having known Him, (fettered
souls) are freed, and without a doubt, are successful. (30-32)

Swami Lakṣhmanjoo, it seems, reads bhoktādhārarūpam for bhogādhārarāpam, i.e.,

instead of ‘the basis of empirical experience’, ‘the basis of the enjoyer’. According to

Swami Lakṣhmaṇjoo, this ‘enjoyer’ is the Lord of a particular world. The world-orders

are places where individual souls go according to their Karmas, to experience their
consequences. Each world-order has a deity that governs and presides over it. These
deities are also beings subject to transmigration who work out their Karma in their
office as Lords of world-orders. When that Karma is exhausted, they move on to other
worlds. If their Karma is good, they will move up to govern higher world-orders or fall

to govern or be subject to lower ones.
The worlds are called lakṣya in the MV (12/13a). The 118 principal worlds are

described there briefly in Chapter 5. The Dīkṣottara describes the worlds as the palace
of Śiva, the God of gods, as follows:
‘Śiva’s] bhuvana [— manifestations, beginning] in order with the Egg of
Brahmā etc., appear in the form of a palace. The world (or palace) of the God of gods is

made up of various jewels, divine, provided with incomparable virtues, adorned with

indranīla sapphīre, mahānīla sapphire and silver, with pillars made of ruby, ornamented


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Although they have many forms, such as Rudra, the Knower of the Field

(kṣetrajña) etc., (what is meant) here (in particular) are (the deities who are

known as the six) causes beginning with Brahmā. ‘Light” is the Point

with various gems, beautiful with celestial garlands, scents and furnishings, possessed of

divine sovereignty. Knowing the world of the God of the gods one attains to it (it. ‘one
is merged in it’). Ḍīkṣottara 2/10cd-13ab edition and translation by Somadeva (2004:
281-282)

” According to the MV (12/12¢d), ‘Form’ is two-fold as Śiva’s own body made of

mantras and the bodies of other individual mantra beings. The Diīkṣottara (2/4cd)

advocates the practice of these bodies for the Yogi who wishes to win over other deities

such as Brahmā, Viṣṇu or Rudra. However, there the ‘body is specifically the physical
form of Śiva as Ardhanārīśvara. ‘In order to raise to Śiva’s level (bhūmyarthe) and
master all mantras, one should constantly visualize [his] body (vigraha) in the shape of

an [anthropomorphic] figure, white in colour etc., bearing the sickle of the moon [in his

hair], three-eyed, with a serpent for a sacrificial thread, a trident in his hand, mounted on
the bull [Nandin]. His body is joined to half of Umā’s body, which is white like conchshell, like jasmine, or like the moon, dazzling like a thousand suns; [one should
contemplate] the body of the God of gods, capable [of bestowing] all that is desired.”
Dīkṣottara (2/13cd-16ab) edition and translation by Somadeva (2004: 280-28)

” There is a well-known group of six deities found commonly in most if not all early

Śaiva Tantric schools that preside over phases of emanation and other realities, called

the six ‘causes' (kāraṇa). The first of these is Brahmā, generally followed by Viṣṇu,
Rudra, Īśvara, Sadāś
and Śiva. That these are meant here is confirmed by the
quotation below in TĀv ad 1/63. The reading rudrādi (‘beginning with Rudra) has
accordingly been emended to brahmādi (‘beginning with Brahmā’). Concerning them,

see below, note to 6/187ab-187cd (6/186cd-187ab) and 8/9cd-10. In the Kubjikā

Tantras, the first five correspond to the Five Elements, that is, Earth Water, Fire, Air and
Space. Anāśrita Śiva, the last one, is transcendental. They each have a seed-syllable
Mantra termed Praṇava, and are distributed along the axis of the microcosmic body,
world orders and reality levels. See Dyczkowski 2009: intro vol. 1, p.636-652. Torella
(2002: 197, n 3) explains how the first three are understood to function in the
Pratyabhijñā: ʻBrahmā, Viṣṇu and Rudra along with Īśvara, Sadāśiva and Anāśrita
[Śiva] are the so-called Kāraṇas or Kāraṇeśvaras situated on the various planes of reality
in order of increasing ontological dignity. Each of these deities presides over (adhiṣṭhā-)

a plane of reality, brings his devotees to this plane and vice versa, becomes directly
present to those who are absorbed in contemplation of that level of reality (IPVv 3, p.

305). Abhinava . . . connects them with forms of knowledge, levels of the word and

locations in the human body. Brahmā is associated with the first moment of cognition

and manifestation (prāthamakālpakī sṛṭiḥ), with the effusion of paśyantī [the Speech of
Vision] in the form of pratibhā [intuitive imagination], and his locus is in the heart;
Viṣṇu is associated with the continuing of cognition, as in memory and dream, with
madhyamā [Middle Speech] and vaikharī [Corporeal Speech], his locus is the throat;

Rudra with the reabsorption of all discourses, the first step into the supreme word and
his locus is the palate.”
”' According to Swami Lakshmaṇjoo, the ‘light’ mentioned here is the centre of light
found at each junction of the breath, that is, between the ascending and descending,

exhaled and inhaled breath.

The Dīkṣottara (2/5ab) prefers the term ‘light’ (jyotiṣ) to ‘point’ (bindu). There
we read: yogināṁ adhipatyarthaṁ jyoti(h)stho yogam abhyaset | ‘In order to become the

sovereign of Yogins, [the practitioner,] resorting to light, should practice yoga.’ Edition

and translation by Somadeva (2004: 273 note 71). Jayaratha rightly quotes the MV

TANTRĀLOKA

(bindu) because it is (commonly) referred to as ‘light’ in such statements (in the
scriptures) as: ‘the form (of the Point) is that of a Kadamba bud and is like a

radiant star’ ‘Śpace is the Void, characterized as (three higher phases of
12/11ab concerning the nature of the Point (see above note 1,550). The complete verse

says:

‘The form (of the Point) is that of a Kadamba bud and is like a radiant star,

Although one, it is considered to be ten-fold because of the difference of (its various

colours) white etc. MV 12/11


The MV does not explain the practice of the ten-fold Point, Somadeva (2004:


272) suggests a parallel practice from the Svacchandatantra 12/152-153cd called

sṣaṇmukhīkaraṇa (the yogic practice of the Six Openings) (see below note to TĀ
5/129ab-132cd (5/128ab-131cd)). This he summarizes as follows: ‘This requires the

Yogin to seal the openings of his ears with his thumbs, his eyes with his index fingers
and middle-fingers, and his nose with the ring- and little-fingers, and then fix his mind

on the six openings. The ten colours are enumerated as white, red, yellow, black, green,

orange, blue, variegated, translucent and delightful” (= moon-coloured). The Yogin
instructed about [their corresponding] reality levels [1artva], is advised to reject all but

the ‘delightful” drop [i.e. point]. It resembles the disc of the moon, is bright as lightning
and flickers like a star.”
MV 12/11ab. The bud of the sacred Kadamba tree is about the size ofa golf ball. Īt is
covered with golden brown bristles that give the impression that it is shining. The
dimensionless Point that here represents the light of consciousness, is commonly
described as having this form. For a discussion of this symbolism and examples, see

Dyczkowski 2009 vol. 2, 125-129. The Point is compared to a shining star below in
3/113ab (3/113cd).

The MV (14/14cd-16ab) refers to three Voids in the head (kakhatraya) and three
beyond (khatraya). Another Void is in the heart, but as this is not relevant to this
practice, it is not mentioned. The details are described below in the notes to verses
32/10cd-12ab, where this passage from the MV is quoted. The Dīkṣottara teaches the

meditation on the Void as follows:

‘(The yogi) should contemplate the supreme firmament, devoid of quality,

beyond contact, without lunar mansions and constellations, as resembling clear crystal.

(The yogi) fully merging into the Void, located in the Void, identified with the Void,

attains final liberation.’ (2/18c-19a, translation and edition, Somadeva 2004: 268)

Somadeva notes that more is explained in Chapter Three of the Dīkṣortara,

where it is said that the yogi must pass through a series of five Voids, each of which is
five-fold. These five Voids appear to be an extension of an underlying triple Void, to

which most of Chapter Three is dedicated. These are the lower, middle and upper Voids,

that are located in the heart, throat and palate, respectively. These are said to be subject
to afflictions (sāmaya), whereas the fourth Void above them is free of them (nirāmaya).
The text is unclear as to its location. But it is most probably on the top of the head. The

fifth Void, which is not clearly named, must correspond to the supreme plane of
existence. The overall scheme of an ascending series of Voids starting from the heart up
to the limit of the subtle body at a distance of twelve fingers above the head is not

uncommon in the early Śaiva Āgamas. They may be coupled, as happens in the

Svacchandatantra, with the ‘utterance (or ‘upward motion’) of Mantra’ that ascends

first through levels of audible sounds experienced in these centres, and then from the
eyebrows to the top of the head and beyond through a series of sonic energies. Called


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


the upward flow of the Divine Sound of OMṀ and other seed-syllable Mantras,

namely) Power (śakti), the Pervasive One (vyāpinī) and the Equal One

(samanā).™ ‘Wordʼ is (Divine) Sound (nāda).” ‘Mantra (is, for example,

the Garland or Ladder of Sound (see below, 5/56cd-57ab), the SvT (4/288d-296c)
distributes them through a series of six Voids that must be transcended to enter the

seventh one beyond. See below, note to 6/187ab-187cd (6/186cd-187ab) for a table of

theṣe correspondences; also, Somadeva 2004: 263-271 and tables ibid. on pp. 260-261.
Jayaratha, ignoring the distinction between the Voids and the levels of sonic
energies, identifies the three Voids with the three — Power (Śakti), the Pervasive One

(Vyāpinī) and the Equal One With Mind (Samanā), that lead to the Transmental
(Unmanā), which is the last of the series. See Dyczkowski 1992a: 252-255 for a detailed
account and the Appendix to this chapter.

See MV 12/9 ff. See Dyczkowski 1992a: 211-212 and below, note 580.

Somadeva (2004: 277-279) explains what is meant here by Sound (nāda). ‘It is the
Resonance within the three main channels of the subtle body. The left channel, called

iḍā, resonates with the ciñcinī sound, the right channel, called piṅgalā, with the sound of
cricket (cīra), and the central susumnā channel reverberates like a bell. When the belllike resonance in the central channel dies down the Yogin attains the silent, liberated

state of Śiva.

‘[The Yogin] who merges into this Resonance attains ultimate liberation. From
meditation upon Resonance, there is no doubt, accrue ultimate liberation and
Perfections. Therefore, one should undertake the meditation with diligent effort. On the
left side is the [channel] Iḍā, its supreme sound is ciācinī. It (the sound) is said to be
insentient (prākṛta) and coarse (sthūla). To the right of [the channel called] Suṣumnā is
the Piṅgalā [-channel resonating with] the sound of the cricket. It is said to be conscious
(pauruṣa), and so is called subtle. The Resonance at the end of the reverberation of a
bell [manifests] in its (the central channel’s) middle; it is supreme. At the end of [the
resonances of] the voices of Ciñcinī and the cricket [respectively, the Yogin] is
unsupported and unlocated. Diīkṣottara 2/20ab-24ab (2/20-24). These sounds
commonly appear in lists of ten inner sounds yogis hear. For details, see below,
5/100ab-100cd (5/99cd-100ab) commentary and notes.

The equivalent in the corresponding series in the MV is the phoneme (arṇa). But the

Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha uṣes the synonym ‘Mantra’, as does the Dīkṣottara. 1t

refers to a common practice found in multiple forms and variants in the early Tantras of
all kinds, as in the Tantrāloka, namely, the utterance of Mantra (mantroccāra). This

takes place in consonance with the movement of the breath through locations in the

subtle body and then outside and beyond, marked by energies which are phases of its
sound and resonance. The basic pattern is the utterance of (H) A U Ṁ. The Tantras
supply the stages of the upward movement of ‘utterances’ of numerous seed-syllables
on the same model, with the usual variants. See Dyczkowski 2009: intro. 1, 376 ff. The
Dīkṣottara teaches the utterance (uccāra) of the syllable HAṀSA as the ‘Mantra-form’.

Somadeva (2004: 284 ff) explains: ‘it instructs the practitioner to begin by effecting a

union or fusion (sarṁghāṭa) of theē HAṀSA mantra located in his heart-region.
‘[After] producing a mantra-fusion located in his heart, the wise [practitioner]
should [then] perform the imposition of the [mantra-] body together with the [five
causal deities] Brahmā etc. (i.e. Viṣṇu, Rudra, Īśvara and Sadāśiva), the Kalās [Forces]
and the Tattvas [metaphysical principles], which are traditionally known to effect all
Perfections. In this way, one should ceaselessly contemplate the bindu located in the

sloping portion [of the forehead] as Īśvara. Iśvara located in the aperture [of the

cranium] is Resonance, but [clearly] manifest, he is [traditionally] taught to be Śiva.
[The four/five stages are] the 1) HAṀSA, 2) the drop (bindu), 3) Resonance (nāda), and

TANTRĀLOKA

the audible part of the syllable OṀ which) consists of the letters A, U and M.

(The words) ‘associated with (the Divine) Point (bindu) and Sound (nāda)

etc.’ qualify (Mantra).”’ As is said (in the Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha):

‘Adepts should meditate on Śiva as being six things, according to the

various fruits (they desire); (they are) the Point (bindu), Sound (nāda) and

Space (vyoman), Mantra, World-order (bhuvana), and Form (vigraha).


Again (according to the Svacchandatantra):

‘(With respect to the supreme state) the Transmental (unmanā) is

another (lower) state of being (bhāva); the gross (state) is considered to be

another (apara) (lower) than that. Again, the Void, which is Space, followed by

Touch, Word (= Sound) (nāda) and the End of Sound (nādānta)), Light (= the
Point (bindu) pervaded by the Obstructress (nirodhikā) and the Half Moon
(ardhacandra), Mantras (denotators of the nature of the reflective awareness of
the letters A, U, and M), the Causes (= Rudra, Upendra and Brahmā denoted by

4) the Fading of Resonance (nādānta). The mantra practitioner who knows this
irreversibly becomes (5) manifest Śiva. Dīkṣottara 2125ab-27cd (2/25cd-28ab)

Once the breath has been gathered into the Heart it rises from there through the
location of the five causal deities. These are typically, as we find in the SVT (4/262266), Sāráhatrīṁśatikālottara (25/8cd-12ab), the Parākhyatantra (14/73-75ab): Brahmā
— heart, Viṣṇu — throat, Rudra — palate, and Īśvara — the forehead. In some cases (as in
SVT), these are followed by Sadāśiva beyond, which there is Śiva or just Sadāśiva (also
called Śiva), counted as the fifth, with Śiva as transcendent beyond. The five Forces
(kalā) delineate as many spheres, into which the thirty-six principles ranging from Earth

to Śiva are divided. The former are described in detail below in Chapter Eleven and the
latter in Chapter Nine.

According to Swami Lakshmanjoo, Jayaratha is mistaken here. Mantra according to

him may be any Mantra. The syllable OM is just an example. Moreover, Swami
Lakṣhmanjoo says that these are two aspects of Śiva, not Mantra. Jayaratha understands

the expression ‘bindunādādisaṁbhinnaḥ’ to be an adjective qualifying the word
‘mantraḥ’ in the previous line, whereas Swami Lakshmanjoo understands it to relate to
‘saḍvidhaḥ siva . . .’ “Śiva Who is six-fold’ of the next line. In view of the following
verse, which Jayaratha himself quotes, which sustains Swami Lakshmanjoo’s view, one
wonders why Jayaratha explained it otherwise.

Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgaraha 20/38b. Somadeva analysing this verse, explains that

according to the Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha, these six correspond to the culminating

experience which is the goal (lakṣya) of each of the corresponding six Paths that
constitute the Śaiva cosmic order (ṣaḍadhvan) and are considered to be six aspects of
Śiva. Theṣe are: world-order (bhuvana) = Path of the Worlds (bhuvana), Form (vigraha)
= Path of the Principles, Space (vyoman) = Path of the Forces (kalā), Sound (nāda
/dhvani) = Path of Mantra, Mantra /Aṛna = Path of the Letters (varṇa) and the Point
(bindu /jyotis) = Path of the Parts of Mantra (pada).

According to the SvT, the six correspond to six stages in the utterance of the Mantra

OM, as outlined in the following footnote.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


them) and the World-orders (= the principles which are grounde
d in the

Causes).


Again (according to the Mālinīvijayottara):


‘The division of the target (lakṣyabheda) is considered to be six-fold

divided into Space, Form, the Point, Letter, World-orders and Path.
Moreover, wherever a person is firmly resolved here (within
this sixfold order), he attains (what he is seeking) there in accord with the
dictum: “(the

disciple) is conjoined (by his teacher) there (to the level of reality)
where (he
can experience) the worldly enjoyments he desires (and attains
the

corresponding) accomplishments (siddhi) (by the power of Mantras).’ Thus,

he says:

These lines are SYT 4/269-270ab. The printed edition of the SYT reads tasyāpar

punaḥ śūnyaṁ saṁsparśaṁ ca tato ʻparaṁ for punaḥ śūnyaṁ
ca vyomātmā
saṁsparśaṁ ca tataḥ paraṁ. Read with the edition of the SYT unmanā
tv aparo bhāvaḥ
(‘the Transmental is a lower state of being) for unmanā tu paro
bhāvaḥ (‘the

Transmental is the supreme state of being’). The reading in the SvT is sustained

by

Kṣemarāja’s explanation: ‘the Transmental is the reflective awarenes
s of one’s own
nature and s0, as such, because it is a subtle state of propensity (to the
attainment of the
supreme 5tate), it is, with respect to the supreme (transcendental
state of) being
(parabhāva), a lower (immanent) one (apara). 1t is the great (universa
l) being (of all
things) (mahāsattā). 1t is the subtle state of being and (includes
also) non-existence
(abhāva). This is the connected (prose order). (The next level down)
is the Equal One
(samanā). It is not ‘another’” (apara), because it is (entirely) separate
(from) it but is

closely associated with that nature called the Transmental, to which it is related

what is pervaded by that which pervades it. It is in that respect that

as is

it is gross, whereas

that too is subtle with respect to the letter A etc. (of OMṀ, of which these are

the sonic

energies). Another (level with respect to) the state of the Equal One
is the Void, the
nature of which is the Pervasive One (vyāpinī) that pervades (āsūtraṇa
) all phenomena
(bhāva) and is (called) the Great Void. This is the meaning.
Kṣemarāja goes on to explain that ‘the Pervasive One is the first of
two Voids
which, because it is pervasive, serves as the foundation (bhitti) for the
manifestation of

all things, whether existent or non-existent. Touch is Śakti. Word is Sound

and the End

of Sound. Light is the Point, pervaded by the Obstructress and the Half
Moon. Mantras
are the reflective awareness of the letters A, U, and M, which are the
denotators (vācya)
of the Causes, that is, Rudra, Upendra and Brahmā denoted by them. The
world-orders
are the principles that are grounded in the Cauṣal Deities.”

MV 12/9. The MVʼs explanation of the six is brief but has been reconstru

cted with

the help of other sources by Somadeva (2004: 263-271).

This passage is quoted ad 1/61cd-62 (62cd-63), ad 8/210-212 (209cd-212ab) and

ad

it twice below in 15/2cd-3ab and as 28/263cd-264a (264abc). In the first instance

he

8/435-436ab (434cd-435). The first quarter is quoted ad 15/30. Abhinav

a himself quotes

says that it is from the Svāyambhuva and in the second from the Svayambh
ūtantra. He
paraphraseṣ as he explains it in 8/435ab (434cd). Rāmakaṇṭha
quotes it in the
Mataṅgavṛti ad vidyāpāda 3/23c-25b and 26/63. There the reading
is mantrasāmarthyāt for mantraśaktyā of TĀ 15/3b. It occurs in the South Indian
Svāyambhuva
as 40/2c-3b (IFP T. 39, p.148). There the second line ends with syād
atroktam aviṣṭarāt.

The source is in actual fact the Sūkṣmasvāyambhuva. Goodall (2004:

XXXVI n 50)
notes that ‘Vaktraśambhu quotes two and a half verses that he
attributes to the
Sūkṣmasvāyambhuva in the Mṛgendrapaddhatiṭīkā (IFP T 1021 p. 127)
and plainly

TANTRĀLOKA

ā JTTēṬ] |

Tī āīaī aīa- || 331
yo yadātmakatāniṣṭhas tadbhāvaṁ sa prapadyate |
vyomādiśabdavijñānāt paro mokṣo na saṁśayaḥ |l 63 1

(The adept) attains the state of being which is the essential nature of
that (one out of these six aspects of Śiva) in which he is resolutely
established (niṣṭha),® (whereas) supreme liberation is (attained) without a
doubt by a complete knowledge (vijñāna) of the (pervasive) resonance

(Śabda) of (all these aspects) starting with Space. (63)

The adept (attains) ‘the state of being of that’ world-order etc. in the

essential nature of which he is ‘resolutely established (niṣṭha)’.The meaning

is that (he attains) a specific accomplishment (siddhi) according to the nature of

each (corresponding) world-order etc.® That is said (in the Śvacchandatantra
in the following passage) beginning with:

‘He who meditates on a world-order, the one (specific) form of which

will be explained (further ahead), attains the lordship of (that) world. . . .
1) He who always recollects the form (vigraha) of the causes beginning
with Brahmā, whose characteristic is as described previously, attains that
distinguishes the work from the Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha, for he twice mentions

both works together in lists.’
It is also quoted by Kṣemarāja in his commentary on the Svacchandatantra ad

4/415abc and 8/3b-10. In the first instance, he comments on the following:

‘Having experienced (the consequences of his karma, the disciple) travels
upwards, where he is conjoined by his teacher into the differentiated (aspect of deity

with form) (sakala) or into the undifferentiated (without form) (niṣkala).” SVT 4/415abc
Kṣemarāja explains that (he is conjoined) ‘where he desires worldly
enjoyments (bhoga). In accord with this teaching, he is conjoined there into the
differentiated (aspect of deity with form) (sakala) (into one or other) lord of a world, so

that he may be united with it. Or else, when the experience of the consequence of
auspicious Karma comes to an end, one who desires liberation is conjoined to
undifferentiated Śiva and goes to that same plane.”

In SvTu ad 8/3b-10 he writes: he who is conjoined there itself (by the teacher

in the course of initiation) to where he desires worldly enjoyments is successful (by the

power of Mantra). Those particular deities who have been worshipped by the worship
of these, the adept’s mantras, they are then all of Bhairava’s nature itself, and (so) are
means to achieve all the accomplishments.”

Instead of ‘resolutely established’ (i.. ‘upon which he is firmly resolved') Somadeva

translates ‘whichever of (the six) nature(s) he depends on’. The ĪPKau (fl. 3a) reads
Yadātmakatāviṣṭhas (‘the essential nature of that in which he has penetratedʼ) for
yadātmakatāniṣṭhas (‘the essential nature of that in which he is resolutely established’
).

Abhinava sums up in just one verse the point of the whole process expounded in

CHAPTER TWO OF THE DĪKṢOTTARA.
--------------------------------------------------


Read tadrāpatāyāṁ for tadrūpatāyā.
The world-orders, their contents, forms, presiding deities, associated experiences and
attainments are presented in detail below in Chapter Eight.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


(deity’s) nature. 2) By means of Mantras (he attains) the accomplishment

(siddhi) of Mantra by the repetition of Mantras, fire offerings and worship. 3)

By meditating on (their) form described previously, (he) is successful. There is

no doubt here (about it). 4) By meditating on the Light, the lord of yogis attains
the accomplishment (siddhi) of yoga. He then attains its nature and becomes the
king of yogis. 5) By meditating on the Void, his nature is the Void. The one
who is pervasive (by meditating on the Pervasive One) is present everywhere. 6)
By the yoga of meditation on the Equal One (samanā), the yogi attains

omniṣcience.

As these, although six, are (all) Śiva by nature, it is said that: ‘having
meditated on Śiva (he becomes) of (His) nature. According to this teaching,
one attains one’s own essential nature which is Śiva even when one enters
into each one individually, because (they are all) one with Śiva. So he says: ‘by
a perfect knowledge (vijñāna) of the (pervasive) resonance (śabda) of (all
these aspects) starting with Space’. ‘Resonance’ (śabda) is the production of

the resonance (śabdana) of the resonances of these six, that is, Space and the

rest. It is supreme reflective awareness. As it is of that nature, that ‘perfect
knowledgeʼ is the experience (of them all). Thus, without a doubt one

(attains) ʻsupreme liberation’, which is the attainment of oneness with Śiva,

Whose sole essence is reflective awareness. This is the meaning of (this)

statement. If (we accept) the (variant) reading ‘the group of six starting with

Space,” one should explain (it to mean that one attains supreme liberation) by

the particularly excellent (visiṣṭa), unconditioned knowledge of the group of six,

that is, Space and the rest.” The sequence beginning with world-orders (to

which the previous verse refers) is not meant here. Thus, accordingly, the one
beginning with Space is applied here.

SVṬ 4/271-276. The following verses describe what happens at the Transmental level

as the experience of ‘Nonbeing’ (abhāva), which is the Void of transcendental Śiva (see

Dyczkowski :2004: 51 ff., which is dedicated to this subject). These levels of
consciousness are described below in the note to TĀv ad 1/83ab-84cd (1/83cd-85ab).

SVT 4/271d (omitted in the long quotation above).
Read with all the MSs except K, Kh and G: ṣvasvarūpalābho for —svarāpalābho.

Somadeva (2004: 257 n. 31) explains that here Jayaratha interprets Abhinavagupta

as teaching that liberation is achieved by the direct experience of śahdana [Resonance],
which he explains is the highest reflective awareness of the words denoting the six
goals. In fact, the Dīkṣottara and the Svāyambhuvasūtra-saṁgraha teach that the
highest liberation is achieved by only these two goals: vyoman [Void] and śabda

[Resonance].”

! It seems that some manuscripts Jayaratha consulted read vyomādiṣaṭka- ‘the group of
six starting with Space’ instead of vyomādiśabda- ‘resonance (śahda) of (all these

aspects) starting with Space’. According to Swami Lakshmanjoo, Abhinava lists Space

(vyoman) first here, although it was the fourth in the previous verse, because the Lords
of the Worlds (bhuvanesśvara) etc. are one only, that is, Lord Śiva. In order to indicate

that they are all equal, he does not observe the same sequential order.
The word ‘vijīūāna’ is here understood to mean particularly excellent (visiṣa)
knowledge (jñāna).

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely, (one may ask,) if (Śiva) is omniform, how is it that He is said to
be just six-fold? With this doubt in mind, he says:

f-ṣftr
āaza ācr--Tvrīq 1|

] || Ṝ II
viśvākṛtitve devasya tad etac copalakṣaṇam |
anavacchinnatārūḍhāv avacchedalaye ‘ṣya ca || 64 ||
Moreover, as God is omniform, that (series is only) a secondary

(metaphorical)

designation

(of His

nature

in

the context of)

His

(progressive) ascent into (His) unconditioned state and of the dissolving
away of His limitations (into His transcendental state). (64)
(The Lord's six-fold aspect) is only ‘a secondary characteristic’
(attributed to Siva) in order to establish by means of that that (He is) the sum

total (saṁgraha) of the entire universe. It is not only a secondary characteristic
with respect to His cosmic form, rather it is so in another case also, so he says
(that it is so also of His) ‘(progressive) ascent into (His) unconditioned state’

etc. ‘The dissolving away of limitations’ means that the limitations, beginning
with the world-orders, that contract (Śiva’ s consciousness) are dissolved away
into (His) transcendental state. The intended meaning (is that thisis a secondary

characterization of Śiva in the sense that) He does not fall from His essential
nature even when (in His immanent state). He is all things.

But surely (someone may object that) by accepting that He has a fixed
nature (niyatātmika) in this way, what is being said (effectively) is that He is
conditioned in both respects also (as immanent and transcendent). It is with this
doubt in mind that he has said that (the Lord’s omniformity is apparent even in
the course of) ‘His (progressive) ascent into (His) unconditioned stateʼ’. Even
when He is (immanent and is) all things, because He transcends all things, (He

is perpetually) developing into (His) unconditioned state, and (so) the one free
(awakened) consciousness (hodha) manifests (lit. ‘shines radiantly°) in this way
and that.
Surely (one may ask,) how is it possible for the one (Śiva) to transcend

all things when He is (simultaneously) everything at one and the same time? In

order to quell this doubt, he corroborates (what he says) with scripture (that

supports this view):

3sk s ājītṁi ta k

In this and the following verse, Abhinava explains how Śiva can be both everything,

thatis, immanent, and yet at the same time, without contradiction, transcendent. He

explains this in two ways. One is dynamic, according to which Śivais engaged in

transforming Himself from one to the otherin the timeless rhythm of the present. The

other is spatial. The two aspects subsist together, with the transcendent one serving as
the ground of the immanent one.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


uktaṁ ca kāmike devaḥ sarvākṛtir nirākṛtiḥ |
jaladarpaṇavat tena sarvaṁ vyāptaṁ carācaram || 65 ||

“And it is said in the Kāmika: ‘“God is (both) formless and
omniform, just like water or a mirror (when images are reflected in them).
He pervades all things, both (animate and) moving, and (as well as

inanimate and) immobile, (and assumes their form)’. (65)

(The form of) a jar, for example, reflected within a mirror or the like, is

not separate from the mitrror even though it manifests as separate from it,

otherwise (if it were to be), the manifestations of the mirror and the jar would be

mutually separate from one another (and so we would see the jar resting on the
mirror). In the same way, although Śiva Himself, Who is the Light (of

consciousness), is making this universe of mobile (sentient) and immobil
e

(insentient) things manifest by His own (free) will by separating it off from His

own essential nature, (He) pervades it. (This must be s0,) because (its) manifest

state could not logically be explained otherwise. And (so) He has encompassed

it as not separate from His own essential nature. Thus, even when (Śiva) is
(immanent) as all things, (He is transcendent) beyond them, and even when
He

transcends them, He is of their nature. So in both respects also, there is no
defect. Thus it is said that (He is both) ‘formless and omniform’. (He is both)

omniform,

(that

is,

immanent

as)

the

universe,

and

formless

(that

is,

transcendent) beyond it.® And (it also means that), even having returned

After a short detour to the teachings of the Dīkṣottara, (TĀ 1/61cd-63 (62cd-64)) and

a brief gloss in verse 64 (65), Abhinava returns to the citation of the Kāmika begun

1/58-59ab (59-60ab).

in

This line is quoted by Jayaratha below in TĀv ad 3/21-22. I is striking how few

sources Abhinava cites in order to support Utpaladeva’s Doctrine of Reflection

(concerning which see below 3/1-60). One is the Kāmikāgama cited here. This

may be

the same source to which Abhinava refers in 3/21-22 and TĀv as a teaching taught
by
the ‘God of the gods’. Jayaratha quotes a few more sources. Amongst them, notably are
Buddhist Yogācāra texts. Indeed, that the world is like a reflection in a mirror is a

common analogy in the Mahāyāna sūtras, especially the Gaṇḍavyūha. However, there it
is presented as a vision of the illusory nature of the world that appears but is without
substance or independent nature of its own. According to the Pratyabhijñā,
the
reflections within the mirror of consciousness are produced by the power of the
mirror

itself and so are as real as it is.

”° The pervasive nature of Sadāśiva is one of his major characteriṣtics eulogized in the

string of his names and epithets forming the Vyomavyāpin Mantra (the Mantra
of Śiva
who pervades the sky). Commonly applied as the Mantra of the Path,
it is one of the
most important Mantras of the Siddhānta corpus. So it is very significant that there
he is
portrayed as both Space and the one who pervades Space. Here we have a
deeper

explanation of how and in what sense He is pervasive.
Śiva, the Light of consciousness, manifests the entire universe out of His own

free will in the same way, as separate from Himself, although in reality it is not.
Thus,
He pervades everything. If He were not to be all-pervasive, He would be limited
and not

be the unlimited, universal Light that makes all things manifest, and so nothing would

manifest. Moreover, as nothing in reality differs from Him, everything unfolds

within

TANTRĀLOKA

back” into (any) reality level (tattva), He (continues to) transcend it. In this
way this Supreme Lord, Who is Light and one only, unfolds everywhere. This is

God's nonduality (varādvaya) as it is in reality (paramārthataḥ).

Surely, (an opponent may object): one may agree to this much, namely
that phenomena (bhāva lit. ‘existing things') have no separate being (sattā) of
their own in relation to (the light of consciousness,) because it is not logically
possible for them to manifest separately (independently of it), and so in relation
to phenomena, God, Who is the light (of consciousness), is one only. However,

it is said that He possesses (various) attributes such as ubiquity and the like.

In relation to that, it is undeniable that there is a mutual difference (bheda)
between the attributes and their possessor as well as the attributes (themselves).

So how can one prevent the manifestation of this duality (bheda) (affecting the

oneness of) the Lord so that He (remains) one only and the doctrine of

nonduality can be established? With this doubt in mind, he says:

na cãsya vibhutādyo ‘yaṁ dharmo ‘nyonyaṁ vibhidyate |
Nor are His (divine) attributes of ubiquity and the rest (essentially)

different from one another.®" (66ab) (67ab)

(Śiva’s) ‘(divine) attributes of ubiquity and the rest’ are not separate
from His own (essential) nature. No attribute excels (and hence differs) from

Him. Rather, it is (His) own nature. Ubiquity is said to be (Śiva’ s) state of

(universal) pervasion, and thatis possible if whatis pervadedis separate from
Himself. (However, it must also be one with Him.) It is not possible for there to

Him. Thuṣ, although He is immanent, He is also transcendent and vice versa. He is both
omniform, as the universe (viśvamaya) and, beyond it (viśvottīrṇa), He is formless.

Read āvṛttya for āvṛttyā.
N The point is that Śiva repeatedly manifests as and through the thirty-six principles

(tattva), collectively and one by one. In the latter case, he assumes a particular form as
one of the principles without this affecting His essentially transcendental nature, just as

when He manifests as all of them, He continues to transcend them. Swami Lakshmanjoo

explains that: ‘(Śiva) is not all-pervading, because non-pervadingness would be

excluded; so there would not be real pervasion. There is nothing for Him to pervade. If
He is All-pervading, the negation of non-pervasion is excluded but there is no negation
at all for Him: He is all-pervading and He is not all-pervading, He is eternal and He is

not eternal, He is both universal and not universal. These attributes of Lord Śiva are not
really separate from one another. His being is not divided that He can be seen in these
three ways. He has only one aspect which includes every other — Svātantrya (freedom) —
thisis the real way of explaining Śiva.

Kashmiri Śaivism is called īśvarādvayavāda — the view that maintains God’s

nonduality. This name defines the essential difference between the nondualism of all the

Kashmiri Śaiva schools and that of others such as the Advaita Vedānta, and the
Buddhists who do not accept the ultimate reality of God.

“ See above, 1/59.

Cf. below 1/198-200.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


be any directions in space (dik) and the like in relation to the supreme Light (of

consciousness).” So what could it pervade?

(Similarly), eternal existence is not (Śiva’s) attribute, because He is

present in (all) three times (past, present and future), and also because He is not

measured out in time. It is with this intended sense that it is said, for example,

that ‘this Self has shone forth (just) once.’ The same (applies to His)

omniformity. In relation to that there is no (separate, independently existing)

universe that (Śiva) also may have (some) form (in relation to). Similarly, there

can be no difference between these (divine attributes) in any way in relation to
the supreme Light (of consciousness, as each of them is one with the Light,) nor
are they mutually different (bheda) from one another. So he says: “nor are they
(essentially) different from one anotherʼ.

Surely, if this is the case, how is it that (Śiva) is said to be ubiquitous,
eternal, omniform and so on, (implying) that there is a difference (bheda)
between (His) attributes? With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Powers of Śiva’s Freedom

gs scaīzīī ft |

eka evāsya dharmo ‘sau sarvākṣepeṇa vartate || 66 ||
tena svātantryaśaktyaiva yukta ity āñjaso vidhiḥ |

He has only one attribute that includes all the others. Thus the
precept (vidhi) is sound (which states) that He is united with the power of
(creative) freedom (svātantrya) alone. (66cd-67ab) (67cd-68ab)
(Śiva) ‘has only one attribute’, which is (His) own nature, called the
reflective
awareness
of
(pure,
universal)

(consciousness)

(ahaṁpratyavamarśa) that includes all the attributes of ubiquity and the rest.
The meaning here is that that is said to be this reflective awareness of the (pure)

“ The directions ~ in front, behind, to the left or right etc. — can only be so in relation to
some fixed point in space, not in relation to the supreme (para) Light of consciousness,
which shines everywhere as all things. Spatial directions exist only in relation to the

lower (apara) light of consciousness which shines as individual things.

‘Juṣṭ once’ in this sense is not an event set in time. See note above in TĀv ad 1/57.

“ The reference from the Kāmikāgama appears to extend up to 66cd (67cd). What
follows is Abhinava’s gloss. The reason for this I believe is the shift of terminology.
The Kāmika talks about Śiva’s attributes — dharma — and how they are all ultimately His

one attribute —— which is essentially His own nature — that includes all of them. Abhinava
continues by explaining in Pratyabhijñā terms that this one dharma is Śiva’s power of
creative autonomy — svātantrya. This equation opens the door for Abhinava’s exposition
of the Nature of Śakti and its functions, operating through its innumerable forms, to
conclude that Śiva and Śakti are one (1/66cd-73 (68ab-74)). Thus, he explains in these
terms how Śiva is both transcendent (as Śiva) and omniform (as Śakti). Then he begins
a lengthy citation from the Kiraṇa.

“ This verse is quoted below in TĀv ad 10/12cd-17. See above, note 1,375 concerning
the translation of the term svātantrya as ‘freedomʼ and ‘creative autonomy’.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘T’ of the Light (of consciousness), which does not depend on (anything) else to
illumine itself or (anything) else. Thus (this, His sole attribute,) is His freedom
(svātantrya). It is the capacity to generate (countless) thousands of
manifestations in each (and every) place and time etc. It is due to that that even
though the limited perceiving subjects are the outpouring of His own (conscious
nature), in relation to themselves He behaves as (all-)pervasive and eternal etc.

(However,) in actual fact, (all these attributes) are only His power of (creative)
freedom and autonomy (svātantryaśakti), called the reflective awareness of
(pure) ‘T (consciousness). Thus it is said (in the Iśvarapratyabhijñā) that:

‘((The power of) consciousness (citi) is reflective awareness. It is
Supreme Speech that arises spontaneously.) That is the (supreme) primary
(mukhya) freedom and sovereignty of the Supreme Self.

Accordingly, he says: ‘thus’ etc.
Sureḷy, (one may ask,) it is said everywhere that He possesses®” 607 endless
powers beginning with the will and the rest, so how is it that it is said here that
He is united with just one power called ‘freedom’? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

bahuśaktitvam apy asya tacchaktyaivāviyuktatā || 67 ||
Moreover, (the fact that) He possesses many powers amounts to

(His inseparable) union with that (one) power alone. (67cd) (68cd)

The power of (Śiva’s) freedom behaves (in this world) as (if it) were

many, due to the limiting adjuncts (upādhi) (secondarily associated with iīt),
such as each of (the countless) objects of desire and the rest (to which aspects of
this one power, as the power of the will and so on correspond). Thus (the fact
that Śiva poṣsess) many powers amounts to His union with that (one) power. As
is said (in the Mālinīvijayottaratantra);:
“The power of the Sustainer of the Universe, said to be inherent within
Him (samavāyinī), (is the Goddess). It is She Who assumes the form of His will
when He wishes to emit (the universe). Hear now how She, though one,

becomes many.

““TP 1/5/13cd. The sentence in brackets is the first line, which Jayaratha choses to omit.

Utpaladeva explains: “This is the first (and highest) level of Speech, (in and from) which
what it says is undivided. It is without beginning or end and does not depend on
(anything) else, because its nature is eternal consciousness. This is pure freedom that
does not depend on anything else (to exist, act, be and know all things), and is called

(God’s sovereign) lordship.” Clearly, the Supreme level of Speech is the reflective

awareness which is pure, universal ‘I’ consciousness. Concerning the levels of Speech,

see above, note 1,225.
The Sanṣkrit lierally says that Śiva is ‘united or conjoined (yoga) to His powers’, that
is, His one power that possesses countless forms.

“ This line is quoted below in TĀv ad 1/160, ad 2/31cd-32ab) (32) (quotes 1/67 (68)),
3/64ab (64), and 3/193 (192cd-193ab).


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


(When that power instils in (consciousness) here in this world the
certainty that: “this is such and should not be known to be otherwise,” then
(She)

is called the power of knowledge.
When assuming a state of intent towards Her task of the form — ‘may all
this be such’ and at that very instant makes it so, She is called activity here (in

this world).)

Thus, although she, the Mistress (of the universe), has only two forms,
She, like the Wish fulfiling Gem, becomes infinitely diverse through the

limitations imposed upon Her by (Her) objects (arthopādhivaśāt).

Surely, (someone may object that) in this way also the view that
maintains God’s nonduality (īśvarādvayavāda) is not established, because
(you
also) refer to the power of (Śiva’s) freedom, which is separate from Him. With
this doubt in mind, he says:

Śśaktiś ca nāma bhāvasya svaṁ rāpaṁ mātṛkalpitam ḷ
tenādvayaḥ sa evāpi śaktimatparikalpane || 68 |I

The power (śakti) (which is the functional efficacy) of an entity is its

own (specific) nature, as conceived by the subjects (who perceive
it)

(mātṛkalpita) (on the basis of its various effects). Thus (it follows) that (Śiva)
also is (one reality) without a second, (even) when He is conceived
to be

(power and) the possessor of power. (68)

The ‘power (which is the functional efficacy) of an ‘entityʼ, that is,

any existing thing which is the meaning of a word (padārtha), is its ‘own

(specific) natureʼ, as conceived by the subjects (who make use of it)
by

projecting a relative distinction (bheda) (onto it with respect to everything else),

due to the diversity (bheda) of the (perceived) results (of its functional efficacy

with respect to other entities). In fact, it is not some other category of reality
(padārtha). Thus, even when He is conceived to be power and the possessor of
power, He is the same all-pervasive Lord (vibhu), Who is nondual by nature.
Thus, in this way (iti yāvat) there has been no compromise at all of (Śiva’s)
nonduality." That is said (in the following reference):
“”MV 3/5ab-6ab, 8cd-9ab. Jayaratha omits the two verses in the middle of this passage,

but he evidently intends us to refer to them, and so, for the sake of clarity, they

have

been included in brackets. It is quoted several times by Kashmiri Śaiva teachers. For

example, in the SpPra commentary on SpKā 1 and SpKāvi p. 148. See Dyczkows
ki
1992a: 145.

1 One could also translate sataḥ padārthasya (lit. ‘existing thing which is the meaning

ofa word’) as ‘Being and category (of existing things).

! If everything is a manifestaion of consciousness and hence is essentially

consciousness, which is Śiva, how can we distinguish between one thing and another

and why do we do so? The answer given here is that the specific nature of an

entity is

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Power (in the sense of functional efficacy) is the nature of (every type
of) thing. The difference (between one thing and another) is a projection due to
(the perception of) the diversity of the result (of the functional efficacy of each

Surely (one may object,) fine, let that be — there is no difference (bheda)
between power and the possessor of power, (even so,) the energies do differ
from one another. This is again the same defect and that same situation. With
this doubt in mind, he says:

I

mātṛkḷṛpte hi devasya tatra tatra vapuṣy alam |
ko bhedo vastuto vahner dagdhṛpaktrṛtvayor iva || 69 ||
Just as there is (no difference between) the fire’s (capacity) to burn
and cook (and the fire itself always remains one and the same), similarly,
what difference is there in actual fact between the forms (vapuṣ) of God

conceived in various circumstances (tatra tatra) by the (many) perceivers?

(69)

Just as the fire’s power to burn and cook, for example, is conceived to

be (two) different (powers) because of (its) diverse results, namely, burning and

cooking, even so, because the possessor of power has a single nature, (its
powers) cannot in actual fact divide up the essential nature of one another
(which is the possessor of those powers). (Only) an entity which is proved to
characterized by its functional efficacy. The difference between one thing and another is
not in what they are essentially but what they do. A table differs from a cup because its

function is to serve as a support for the objects placed on it, whereas that of a cup is to
hold liquids. These are some of their functional capacities, that is, their powers. From

this perspective, the universe of entities, whether immense or tiny, is a countless number
of powers. These powers are their functional capacities — fire heats, water quenches
thirst, and so on. They differ from one another in that respect, as seen by the perceiver
who has need of one or the other for the corresponding purpose it can serve, although

they are all equally manifestations and forms of consciousness. All these powers
collectively are the one power of Śiva consciousness, who is their possessor and one
with them as is fire with its heat, capacity to burn, cook, and illumine etc. See
Dyczkowski 1987: 111-112.

! Kṣemarāja also quotes this line in a long commentary on SvT 5/88d. Cf. below TĀv
9/68cd-69ab where this line is quoted again.

! Quoted belowin TĀv ad 1/158. Swami Lakshmanjoo points out that Lord Śiva that

appears through forms of His Śakti. Thereis no real difference between them. However,
it is not possible to perceive Śiva directly, that can only take place through His eṉergies.
Thuṣ, they become means (upāya) to realisation. The power of the willis the Śāmbhava

Means, that of knowledge, the Empowered Means, and the Individual Means is the
power of action. See below 1/140 ff. concerning the means to realisation.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


have a separate (individual existence) is divided off from another entity. Power
is not proved to be separate from the possessor of power. So what can be
divided up by what? The nature of (one and) the same fire is conceived to be its

capacity to burn etc. In the same way, even when the Supreme Lord is

conceived to have an endless number of powers, there is no (mutual) difference
(between them and their possessor). Thus, the view that maintains God’s

nonduality is never compromised.
Surely (one may ask,) although conceived in this way, the difference
between powers does manifest, so how can that be denied? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

EIEERrIVĒĒE ṜTĒTAIE-EAITĀĪ

aāãTtkxqā afzrr-sftkṝgxērstṁ
aīaāa 1| 1011
na cãsau paramãrthena na kiñcid bhāsanād ṛte |
na hy asti kiñcit tacchaktitadvadbhedo ‘pi vāstavaḥ || 70 ||
However, this (difference between powers and their possessor) is

not absolutely non-existent (rather it does exist). Nothing exists apart from

(its) manifestation; thus, the difference between power and its possessor is

also real (vāstava) (in this sense). (70)

There is nothing else apart from the light (of the manifestation of

consciousness) (bhāna). Thus, as difference (bheda) also manifests, it is not

nothing at all, rather it is (fully and ultimately) real, and as such the (mutual)
difference also between the powers and their possessor is absolutely real. This is

! One of the fundamental features of Abhinavagupta’s Anuttara Trika is Anuttara, the
nature of which Abhinavagupta has already expounded in great detail in his commentary

on the Parātrīśikā. An important aspect of Anuttara, whichis relevantin this context, is
that, as the Inexplicable, it cannot be characterizedin any way, even as Śiva or Śakti.

This is because it is the prior source of both as aspects of its own nature, whichis
equally the Light of consciousness (i.e. Śiva) and its power of reflective awareness (i..

Śakti). The former is universal and transcendent, whereas the latter is particular and

immanent. Abhinavagupta explains there that:
‘AIl this, which consists of the thirty-six principles, is emanated from Śiva by
His own (inherent) power. He is the possessor of power, whose predominant nature (in

this aspect) is the supreme power, which is the universal vibration (sāmānyaspanda) of

consciousness (as its Light). But, even so, it is made to rest within its own essential
nature, which is Bhairava’s particular vibration (of reflective awareness) (viśeṣaspanda)
(in the aspect which is) predominately (His many) energies. This is how (phenomenally)
existing things are grounded in their own specific nature. (It is,) as is said, ‘wherein
everything is (established)'. Although that (reality), consisting of the oneness of Śiva
and Śakti, the universal and the particular, is indeed one, even so the Supreme Lord

(parameśvara) Himself has differentiated them and described them accordingly, in
order to make instruction and the means to realisation possible. However, it is in reality
nonetheless one alone, and consists of free consciousness, which, as the ‘’, is Anuttara,
the essence of which is the power (of Bhairava’s) sovereignty (aiśvaryaśakti) (that lords
over all things). PTv p. 86.

TANTRĀLOKA

the meaning of (this) statement. Thus, as the relative distinction (between them)
(bheda) is by nature in this way one with the light (of the manifestation of
consciousness), it is not separate (from it). Therefore, the view that maintains

nonduality is not compromised. Nor is the established common designation

(vyavahāra) of (mutual) difference between the powers and their possessor

denied. Thuṣ, all is well.

Surely (one may ask, as) it has been said that the Supreme Lord has just

one power called ‘freedomʼ (ṣvātantrya), are (His powers of) will and the rest

just the sudden manifestation (visphūrjita) of that (one power), or are they other
independent powers? With this doubt in mind, he says:

YNTŪATTTTIĀ TTTTTĀTRTṬĪ fē āq |

svaśaktyudrekajanakaṁ tādātmyād vastuno hi yat |
Śśaktis tad api devy evaṁ bhānty apy anyasvarūpiṇī|I 71 II

What an entity possesses that, by virtue of its oneness with it,

generates an abundance of its own powers, is also a power. (Similarly, the
Lord has only one power, namely) the Goddess, Who even though She

manifests in this way, transcends (Her manifestations).’ (71)

The wonderful variety of the secondary (avāntra) powers of (some)
‘entity, like fire, is that of its own power. Thus the ‘abundance’ of power, that

is, the functional efficacy (sāmarthya) (of that entity), which is established in its

(common) non-specific activity and is the reason for its being (variously)
denotated, ‘generatesʼ, that is, makes manifest, its outpouring as other
particular powers such as (the capacity to) burn and cook (that fire possesses).
Moreover, (it does s0) ‘in identity with that’, its own power, which is such as

described, because its own power, which is of this kind, is (only) one. This is
the prose order (of the words of this verse) (saṁbandha). The intended sense is
that the fire, which has the capacity (to do various things), brings about the
entire range of effects, such as burning and the rest. In the same way, the
Supreme Lord possesses (just one) ‘power, namely, the Goddess’, although
She manifests as (other) secondary (associated) (avāntra) powers, such as the

will and the rest. So although each particular kind (bheda) (of power) arises,

because

its

own

nature

is

not

separate

from

the

supreme

Light

(of

l More literally one could translate anyasvarūpiṇī: (her) essential nature (transcends)

and is other than (Her manifestations). Fire has various powers to burn, cook, and so
on. The fire from which these powers are generated can be understood to be a type of
power that transcends them, encompassing and including all of them. Similarly, Śiva

consciousness, the one universal reality, possess only one power, which is one with it,
through which it generates the countless energies that constitute its manifest forms.
Swami Lakshmanjoo is more interested in soteriological issues than
ontological ones. Thus, he comments on this verse explaining how the energies of will,

knowledge and action that operate as the basis of their three corresponding categories of
means to realisation are ultimately one energy in three forms.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


consciousness, the Goddess Who is) the shining manifestation (of the Light of
consciousness) is called (Śiva’s) freedom (svātantrya). So it has rightly been

said that: “He has only one attribute that includes all the othersʼ." Thus it has

been proved that in this way (Śiva) has just one power called ‘freedom’, which
manifests in this way and as (each) emitted different (kind) (bheda) (of power).

It is not just (Siva’s) power that manifests as the diversity that is
conceived in this way, He Himself (does s0) also. Accordingly, he says:

ftragīj̄dratraāīdīr gīsaTād |

aTfdīTTṬTAḶ TaITTTRGTĪTRJ II/3I
śivaś cāluptavibhavas tathā sṛṣṭo ‘vabhāsate |
svasaṁvinmātṛmakure svātantryād bhāvanādiṣu || 72 ||
It is by virtue of (His) freedom that Śiva (also), without being

deprived of His glorious power (vibhava), manifests in this way in the

course of creative meditation (bhāvanā) and the like, created (ṣṛṣṭa) within
the mirror of (the consciousness of the individual) perceiver, whose

consciousness is (in fact) His own." (72)

Śiva is the (indiviḍual) perceiver who possesses His own contracted

consciousness," and has (as such) assumed an identity (grhītātmagraha) within
the intellect and the rest (of the psychophysical complex) and is well established
(there). (The consciousness of the individual perceiver) is translucent

(svaccha)," and so, because it is capable of bearing a reflected image

' Above, 1/65ab (1/65cd).

” Śiva does not lose His power when He appears as the deity which is an object of
contemplation and veneration. This is because He retains His status as the experiencing
subject even though He makes objects manifest as reflections within Himself, as the
indiviḍual perceiver,
by His own spontaneous activity. Through this same power of

freedom, by which Siva does the impossible, He makes Himself known objectively

without compromising His essential subjectivity. At the level of duality, the individual

perceiver feels that “this is Lord Śiva”. At the intermediate level of unity-in-difference,
he experiences Lord Śiva who is his own nature manifest as all things. Thus, there is

both the oneness of subjective consciousness, and the multiplicity of objectivity with
which itis identified ~ “I am Siva and all this is my glory”. At the highest level of unity,
his experience is that of the perfect oneness of identity with Śiva — “ am Śiva”.

! The text here appears to be corrupt. It reads sivas ca svā saṅkucitā saṁviṭ lakṣaṇaṁ

yasyāsau . . . pramãtã.

" The term ‘ṣvaccha’, which literally means, ‘clean’ or ‘pure’, and its synonyms
‘vimala’ and ‘nirmala’, meaning literally ‘free of impurity°, denote the quality entities

may possess by virtue of which they can reflect other objects within themselves. 1

translate these terms for want of a better word as ‘translucence’ and cognates, which

Jayaratha defines as follows: “If (an entity) possesses the particular quality called
‘translucence’ (svacchatā) with respect to that which posits a reflected image (within it),
then it accepts a reflection of that (within itself).’ (TĀv ad 3/7) Consciousness which

reflects everything within itself is thus supremely translucent. We will come across this

term repeatedly used in this sense, especially in the first part of Chapter Three, where

Abhinava expounds the Doctrine of Reflection (pratibimbavāda). This teaches that

TANTRĀLOKA

(pratibimba) (within itself), it is the mirror within which, ‘in the course of
creative meditation’ (bhāvanā), (listening to) the teaching and the like is, ‘by

virtue of His freedomʼ, ‘created (sṛṣṭa)’ as (some) conceived (particular) kind

(bheda) of object of meditation and the like, and so, as if? assuming the state of
objectivity, ‘manifests'. However, (Śiva) does not also become such (just the
notion of Him does), because He is one with the subject. Thuṣ it is said that

(Śiva manifests in this way) ‘without being deprived of His glorious powerʼ.
The meaning is that He is not deprived of (His) subjectivity (pramātṛbhāva).

That is said (in the Īśvarapratyabhijñā):


‘(The Lord, by virtue of His freedom, which is the absence of duality,
having fashioned (his own)) Self (ātman) that (abides) unforsaken (by that)
freedom, (with notions that He is the Lord (Iśa) and the like, behaves (as such in

daily life).


He concludes this (point, saying):


TīāTTR-T ṬGHT TIĪĪISTT

tasmād yena mukhenaiṣa bhāty anaṁśo ‘pi tat tathā |
śaktir ity eṣa vastv eva śaktitadvatkramaḥ sphuṭaḥ || 73 |I

Therefore, by whatever channel (mukha) (Śiva) Who, although

devoid of parts, manifests thus (as possessing them), is a power. Thus, this
anything that manifests in any form, subjective or objective, does so within
consciousness in the way a reflection appears in a mirror. But unlike the reflection in a
mirror, that depends on the existence of an original image outside the mirror of which it

is the reflection, the reflections within consciousness are produced within it by its
inherent power.
“” ṂSs J, Jh, N, Ṭ and Ḍ replace iva (‘as if’) with eva (‘indeed).

"P 1/5/16. The first line of this verse has a number of variant readings with respect to
the printed editions of the ĪP, which is the form in which it is quoted below in TĀv ad

3/227cd-278ab (277), 9/159 (partially), 11/10cd-12ab, 28 and 15/315-317. The first
quarter is quoted ad 29/126cd-127ab. We read there: svātantryām uktam ātmānaṁ
svātantryād advayātmanaḥ, whereas here the reading is: svātantryād advayātmānaṁ
svātantryād bhāvanādiṣu. The other version means:
‘The Lord, thanks to his freedom, which is the absence of duality, having
fashioned an identity (ātman) which is not devoid of freedom, (variously representing
Himself) by notions that He is Iśa etc., acts (here in the world).”

Utpaladeva explains: “Therefore the Lord, out of His freedom, which is

(perfect, all-encompassing) plenitude, the characteristic of which is a state of oneness
with (all) objectivity, manifests Himself as the knower at that (particular) time by means
of the notions (that He is) God, Śiva, the Knower and the like, for the purpose of the
practice of meditation and the like.”

“ Cf. below, 1/205cd-206 and commentary.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


succession from power to its possessor is an evident (sphuṭa) reality (vastu).
(73)
‘Therefore’, for (this) reason also, namely that manifestation is (only)

logically possible due to (the existence of) the difference between both Śiva and

(His) power that is created (sṛṣtena bhedena) in this way. Śiva is ‘devoid of

partsʼ, as His one nature is solely the Light (of consciousness). But even s0,

‘whatever channel’, that is, (whichever) one amongst the partial (aspects of

Śiva’s manifestation) as the world-orders and the rest (mentioned previously)

He manifests in creative meditation (bhāvanā) etc., is a channel (mukha) which,

as a means to attain Śiva, is ‘a powerʼ. (This view is) in accord with (the
teaching of the Vijñānabhairava,) that states: ‘it is said here that Śiva’s power

(śaivī) is the means (mmukha) (to attain Him)'. There is no other means (upāya)

to understanding (the true nature of things) etc., nor is it reasonable (that there

could be one). Thus, the ‘succession’, which is the relationship between the

means and the goal, that is, between power and its possessor, is well ‘evident’

(sphuṭa). There is no doubt at all here (about this). This is the meaning.

“ VBh 20d; also quoted in TĀv ad 1/1, 3/172 (171cd-172ab), 3/194 (3/193cd-194ab),

6/252ab (251cd) and 29/273cd-274ab. The word ‘nukha’ that I translate here as
‘channelʼ, literrally means ‘face’ or ‘mouth’. Śiva’s face or mouth is the channel through
which He becomes manifest. It is also the channel through which He bestows His grace
and utters the scriptures. See above, note 1,29.

Śiva manifeṣts the countless entities of the universe by means of his energies, or to be
more precise, the energies make Him manifest as each thing of which they are the
functional efficacy. Śiva’s energies, as aspects of His one power of freedom, also serve
as the means by which He is made manifest just as He is, in the fullness of His one

essential natur.. We do not know or perceive the essential nature of things in
themselves. We perceive their qualities and effects. We know fire from its capacity to

heat, give out light, cook, and so on. Similarly, it is not possible to perceive ši
directly. He can only be known through His energies. Thus Śiva’s primary external

energies of will, knowledge and action, operating on the individual˚ level of
consciousness, serve, as we shall see further ahead, as the basis of the three categories of
means to realisation (upāya). See following note.

Although essentially one, in terms of experience and practice, Śakti, which is the

means, comes first, and Śiva, the goal, follows after. The categories of means to
realisation operate through the activity of their corresponding energies. The energy
which functions predominantly at the level of the Individual Means (āṇavopāya) is

action. This is the basic level of practice for most people who are caught up in duality

(bheda). For example, rituals, the recitation of Mantras, the practice of yoga, which
includes working with the breath and body, all function by virtue of the power of
consciousness to act. Clearly, one first experiences this energy and then the goal of its
activity, which is Śiva, Who is the goal to be attained (upeya). Similarly, at the
intermediate, mental level of the Empowered Means (śāktopāya), the power of
knowledge operates, by means of which insight develops through the progressive
refinement of conception and thought. When this process is complete, Śiva is recognised
to be the ultimate source of all mental activity by the power of the pure Transmental
energy of the power of knowledge consciousness possesses to know everything as well
as itself. At the highest level of nondual practice, the power of the will operates as the

energy of consciousness experienced within the pure subjectivity of consciousness,

which impels the operation of all the other energies. It is the undistracted reflective

TANTRĀLOKA

Thus, their relationship (with one another) as the means and the goal, is

proclaimed in various places in the scriptures. Accordingly, he says:

k

-aī --. fkra 1 x1

śrīmatkiraṇaśāstre ca tat praśnottarapūrvakam |
anubhāvo vikalpo ‘pi māṇaso na manaḥ śive || 74 ||
avijñāya śivaṁ dīkṣā katham ity atra cottaram |
That (view) also (expressed in its own way) in the venerable

Kiraṇaśāstra in the (course of a series) of questions and answers (that

begins with the following objection): ‘The experience (anubhāva) (of
hunger and thirst etc.) is mental, and (as such) is also a thought construct

(vikaḷpa). (Thus,) the mind (cannot apply itself) to Śiva. (But) without
having first known Śiva, how is initiation (that serves to conjoin the soul to
Him possible)?” The answer here (to this question) is as follows. (74-

75ab) (75-76ab)

awareness Śiva consciousness has of its own nature, which pours out by the exuberance

of its inherent bliss, impelling the creative functions of its own energies. Here too the

experience of this energy leads to the recognition that one’s own consciousness is

essentially the same Śiva consciousness which possesses it. In this case, the succession
from one to the other is practically instantaneous, whereas at the other two levels it is
progressive and clearly observable. The experience and operation of the power that
leads to Śiva, Who is realised to be its possessor, must be as real as He is for it to be
effective.

“ Liteṟally: ‘there is no mind within Śiva’. The objection here is that if mind could

make Śiva known, that entails that He would be reduced to the level of a thought
construct. However, as we shall see further ahead, the respondent argu es that hunger
and thirst are not thought constructs, but even so, everybody experiences them.
Similarly, Śiva can also be experienced even though the mind cannot conceive him.

“ This is a concise paraphrase of KiT vidyāpāda 9/7-8, which is the fourth passage
quoted in Jayaratha’s commentary. The whole vidyāpāda has been edited and translated
into Italian by Vivanti. Goodall has edited and translated a part of it along with

Rāmakaṇṭha’s commentary. See bibliography. For detailed notices of the many

identified manuscripts of the Kiraṇatantra in Nepal and South India and also previous

editions, see Goodall 1998: Ixxxiv-cīi.

“ Abhinava expounds a teaching of the Kiraṇatantra, namely that although Śiva is not

objective and transcends the mind and its conceptions, He is known by virtue of His

divine attributes. These are experienced by the mind directly, not as concepts. That this

is possible is exemplified by the experience of hunger and thirst. They are not objects of
the outer senses; rather they are known to the mind directly, without the need of
mediating thought constructs. The opponent’s view is that this is not true. Mental
cognition free of thought constructs is not possible — that too develops into a thought
construct. Finite thought cannot grasp Śiva and nor can the mind. Those who maintain

that although not perceptible to the senses, Śiva can be grasped by the mind free of
thought constructs, are mistaken. There is no such mind. But if this is so, how can Śiva


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘That’ has been said in Śiva’s scripture, namely, that the power (of Śiva

consciousness) is the means (to realization). This is the remaining part of the
sentence (that is required to complete the meaning). Thus, in accord with the
two-fold manner of proceeding of the scripture, namely, as word and meaning,
(Abhinava) explains this in accord with the (intended) meaning (of the text,

rather than quoting it literally word by word,) and (so says): ‘the experience . .
.” etc. There (in the Kiraṇāgama) Garuḍa (asks):

‘How can the Śiva principle be a void? That which is void is not in

the purview of the senses. Direct perception is sensory cognition. What is

beyond that (cannot be an object of the senses and s0) is nothing at all.

(The question suggests that) because the Śiva principle is not in the
purview of direct perception, it is nothing at all. Questioned thus, the Lord
(replied with the words) beginning with: .
‘Māyā should be abandoned and Śiva should be adopted (and perceived)
(grāhya). The one who grasps (Him and perceives Him) (grāhaka) is said to be
the individual soul. Śiva (is void in the relative sense that He is) devoid of the

(impure) attributes of Māyā. . .!


And ending with:


‘(Moreover) why should an entity that is beyond the senses not be

experienced?“ It is well known (to everybody) that (a form of) ascertainment
(anubhāva) exists that is perceived (only) by mind, as is, (for example,) hunger

(In this way Śiva asserts that) although the Śiva principle is not directly
perceptible to the external senses, it is an object of the direct perception of the
be known? And without knowing him, how can the teacher initiate his disciple? The
discussion that follows answers these objections.

“” Read, as does Vivanti’s the edition of the Kiraṇatantra, yac chūnyaṁ for tac

“ Kiṟaṇatantra vidyāpāda 9/1. This and the following quotations from the
Kiraṇatantra are found in the vidyāpāda 9/1-13.

KIT vidyāpāda 9/2abc. This ine ends with pasumalaviyogataḥ — because He is not
conjoined to the impurities of the fettered soul’. The text continues (ibid. 9/3): ʻ(Śiva) is

not said to be void because He does not exist, but (is so in a relative sense) with respect
(to the individual soul,) who is other than He. Just as a house can be partially empty

(without being totally s0), such is the case with (Śiva, Who is void because He is
devoid) of the qualities (of Nature), that is, sattva (and the rest).” In other words, Śiva is

void in relation to the individual soul, in the sense that He is devoid of the limitation and

impurities that bind and sully it. This does not mean Śiva does not exist. Indeed, His
pure consciousness nature, although inscrutable, is supremely existent. Verses 9/4-5 are

quoted below in TĀv ad 1/76 (77).
Literally: ‘why should there be no experience also where there is an entity that is
beyond the senses?- MS Kh reads anubhavena kim — ‘what is the use of experience
where there is an entity that is beyond the senses?

““ Ibid. 9/6.

TANTRĀLOKA

mind, and so is (reasonably) established (pratisamāhita) to be something. And

(s0), again repeating this (objection), Garuḍa asked:

‘The ascertainment (of the nature of something) is with regards to an

entity which is (an object of) discursive representation (vikalpārtha), and that
is a thought construct of the mind. Thus, (by accepting this view, the
impossible consequence would follow that Śiva, Who) is beyond the mind
(amanaska lit. “without mind’) and without form, should be known as

(something which is) mental (samanaska lit. ‘with mindʼ). (However) how
can (a teacher) initiate (others) without having known (that) reality? One should

know an entity in all respects (to know it properly), (whereas Śiva) cannot be

known in every way (by means of the mind and its constructs).”

The author, wishing to be concise, formulates the sense of the question

in his own words. The point here is (as follows). It has been stated that Śiva is

directly perceptible to the mind, on the analogy of hunger and the like (that are,

like Śiva, not perceptible to the outer senses). There (in that case), it is a mental
experience (free of thought constructs). (It is said) that ‘here (in this context) the
mind (mnanas) (is said to be the mental faculty that imagines and formulates)

intentions (saṁkalpaka). As, according to this view, mind is (essentially
imagination or) intention (saṅkalpa) by nature, (all that pertains to it is just) a

thought construct, and its nature (is such that it) does not make contact with
(any outer) object (artha), and so (as the mind is limited) to that extent, it is

“ Read with Vivanti’s edition vikalpārthe — ‘with regards to an entity which is (an
object of) discursive representation’ for vikalpottho — ‘arises from a discursive
representation’

“ The edition of the text reads ato (‘so’) for ca tac (‘and that’).

“ A Sanṣkrit note at the bottom of the page explains that: ‘By ‘mental’ is meant the
thinking of the mind. The Śiva principle is not mental and has no form.”

“’ KĪT vidyāpāda 9/7-8.
“ This statement may be SāṁKā 27b. The reading in the editions is atra manaḥ

saṅkalpakam instead of saṁkalapakam atra manaḥ. ṭ is the standard definition of

manas and its function which is also accepted by the Āgamas. For example, in MṛT
vidyāpāda 12/Tabc:
devapravartakaṁ śīghracāri saṁkalpadharmi ca | manaḥ . . .…. . . . . II

Manas impels the deities (of the senses). It moves very quickly, and its nature
is intention.
Cf. also SVT 4/394b: manaḥ saṁkalpa ucyate saṁkalpaḥ kramato jñānam ‘the mind is said to be intention. Intention gradually (becomes) knowledge’. Ksemarāja

glosses saṁkalpa as meaning the will (icchā), and ‘because it indicates the sequence of
all that is the object of desire, it is said that it ‘gradually (becomes) knowledge’.” Thus,
as saṅkalpa evolves into vikalpa, and in a sense they guide one another, they are so

closely related that at times they are indi

uishable.

According to the commonly accepted Sātṁkhya view, the inner mental organ of sense

consists of three faculties. One is the intellect, which assesses the nature of what is

perceived through the senses, inferred thereby or recollected. Its function is
ascertainment (adhyavasāya). Another is the ego, which relates perceptions and notions


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


not a valid means to know Śiva. That is not (and cannot be) known where (no)

means of knowledge operates. So if the Śiva principle is unknown, how is
initiation possible? (Only) once the teacher has known the supreme (Śiva)

principle should he conjoin the initiand there (to it) by means of initiation. So it
is said, for example, that ‘knowledge is (present) within the teacher’. The word

‘īt’ (that in Sanskrit serves to indicate the conclusion of a statement) comes at
the end of the question. When the question Garuḍa utters (has been asked)

‘here’, the reply, which is the response uttered by the Lord, (follows).

He states that:


ÇJTI]¥GTI

kṣudhādyanubhavo naiva vikalpo na hi mānasaḥ | 75 |I

‘Indeed, no! The experience of hunger and the like is mental, but
certainly not a thought construct (and so Śiva, like hunger, can indeed be

experienced inwardly).”" (75cd) (76cd)

The word ‘no!’ is out of sequence and so should be applied as having as

its object the denial of the question, (in the sense that) ‘(no) this is not a
question (that needs to be asked). The word ‘indeed’ (indicates that what he is
about to say) is the reason (for that), namely (that this is not s0,) because the

mental experience of hunger and the like is not a thought construct. This is the
meaning. Initially, they are also the objects of a direct mental perception
(mānasapratyakṣa) that is free of thought constructs. Otherwise, the thought
‘this is hunger” which follows after that (initial direct experience), would not
arise. There is also nothing wrong in them also being the object of conceptual
(savikalpaka) mental perception," because it is accepted that a means of
knowledge (can also operate with regards to that) as it is based on (real

empirical) entities, (such as, in this case, the lack of food and water etc.). In the

same way, Śiva is also in the purview of mental perception; however, the
difference is that (it takes place) by means of (His) energies. As is said there in
the verses that follow (in the Kiraṇatantra):

‘(It is not the case that) where there is (a direct) experience of hunger

and the like, there may be no thought construct (vikalpa). A thought construct

also has as its basis (a real) entity; (however,) that entity is not (an outer,

etc. to oneself as being one's own. Its function is self-arrogation (abhimāna). The third

is ‘mind’ — manas. This is not ‘mind’ in the Western senses of the word, it is the

intention to perceive, recollect etc., and so co-ordinate the sensations that stream in
through the senses with the products and functions of the other two so as to generate the
notions and thought constructs that are, essentially, products of its imagination. Thus, its
function is imagination (saṅkalpa) or intention.

This line is an explicative paraphrase of KiT vidyāpāda 9/9ab, which is the first line

of the passage from there, quoted by Jayaratha, i.e. KiT vidyāpāda 9/9-11.

" Vivanti reports, op. cit. p. 77 note 41, that Rāmakaṇṭha, commenting on 9/9, also

maintains that the experience of hunger and the like is not only conceptual — na punar

vikalpātmaka eva.

TANTRĀLOKA

physical one) like a jar. A thought construct is mental. 1t is subtle, and
dissolves away in the power (of knowledge) the Void, (which is Śiva,
possesses). Present there (the individual soul) is differentiated from (all) other
(things, including Māyā,) and so, (in that state), is said to be devoid of mind.
Perception (jñāna) is (the result) of the conjunction of the Self with the

senses. The Selfis the agent and mind, the action. Here (in this case), Śivais
the goal to be attained (sādhya) (and known). (For that to be possible,) one must
accept that, although all-pervasive, (He is perceived) by means of one (of His)

figurative
Whatis said to be (Śiva’ s) voidness is so (in a secondary)

sense (upacāreṇa)in relation to Māyā. Śivais said to be the Void because He
is devoid of the attributes (of Māyā) such as mutability and the like (which
condition empirical entities). This amounts to saying that in relation to
something else that (Śiva)is not void (and hence can be known as something).
And so (as thisis s0), once Śiva has been known by means of (His) power, the

“ A passage, perhaps drawn from a commentary, found in a note of the Sanskrit text

explains: ‘What is said (here serves to) refute (the view that the) nature (of the mind) is
such that it does not make contact with (any) object (artha). He states the (right) manner
(to understand the matter) there (in that case), saying that ‘(a thought construct also has
as its) basis (a real) entity° and so on. (With regards to the statement that) ‘there is no
thought construct (vikalpa) (where there is (a direct) experience of hunger and the like)ʼ,
it is said as a reason for this that ‘(a thought construct also has as its) basis (a real)

entity. (But) if it is based on (a real empirical) entity, then why does it not manifest
(externally) like a jar? Thus it is said that it is not like a jar. The reason there is ‘that a
thought construct is mentalʼ and so on.

Read with the edition of the KiT: tenoktas for tenāsau.

Read with the edition of the KiT: cātmendriyasleṣāt for cātmendriyāśleṣāt.

KiT, Vidyāpāda, 9/9-11. Altṭhough hunger and the like are mental perceptions, they

are not thought constructs. Nonetheless they are known by the power they exert on the

mind. Śiva is perceived by the mind in a similar manner through His power (śakti). A

thought construct (vikalpa) cannot grasp ultimate reality as it is in itself, because a

thought construct is the relative perception of an idea as distinct from others. It is partial
and can serve as a means only to perceiving aspects of experience; through it one can

never come to know reality as a whole. However, although a thought construct is a

mental phenomenon, not all mental phenomena are thought constructs. This is the case

with our feelings, such as the perception of hunger, which, although mental and to some
extent conceptual, are not entirely so. Indeed, all thought constructs (vikalpa) are
preceded and sustained by an underlying mental state which is free of them (nirvikalpa).

The mind does experience Śiva’s power. It is like the experience of hunger, whichis
empirical because obviously it relates to the physical condition of the body, the absence
of food, etc. The experience of Śivais not empirical, it is not based on some empirical
entity. Itis based on theinner mental perception of Śiva’s power of freedomin its

various forms as His will, knowledge and action, etc. Śiva replies that the perception of
hunger is not a thought construct. Even if hunger and the like were to be objects of
mental, discursive perception (savikalpa), this would not be unreasonable, as discursive
mental representations (i.e. thought constructs) are based on something real. Thus Śiva,

like hunger etc., can be perceived by mental perception, by means of one of his powers.
Thus, the teacher knows Siva through one of His powers and so, knowing Him in this
way, can conjoin the aspirant to Him by means ofinitiation.

“ Read with MSs K, ĠG, Ch, J. Jh, N, T and Ḍ -māyāpekṣayo- for -māyākṣayo-.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


teacher conjoins the initiand there (to Him) by means of initiation. Thus there is
no defect (in our view).
Surely (one may ask,) an entity that is known in all respects is (truly)
known, not (one that is only known) in part. A thought construct (vikalpa)
cannot know an entity in all respects because it is applied (to only some
specific, determined) fixed (niyata) aspects (of it). Thus, even if Śiva has been

made the field (of experience) by means of (His) power, (His state) as the field
of that (experience) is not such in all respects, and so is not (truly, fully) known.

He says (in response to) the doubt (raised by) this, the rest of the question:


TTIT-ARHSTT
WṬTRJ āAT āṢ |

Ũraīq 1| oē
rasādyanadhyakṣatve ‘pi rūpād eva yathā tarum |
vikalpo vetti tadvat tu nādabindávādinā śivam || 76 ||

(Anyway Śiva can also be realized by thought). Just as a notion

knows a tree by its form alone even when its taste etc. is not perceived,

similarly, Śiva (is known) by means (of His powers that are aspects of His

nature, such as Divine) Sound (nāda), Light (bindu) and the like. (76)

Here (in this regard), one must concede that a thought construct follows
on from (an original experience) which is devoid of thought constructs. Thus a
(thought construct) perceives a tree by means of, for example, its form alone,

even though (the tree) consists (of numerous qualities) such as form (as well as)

taste etc. That (form) cannot be perceived as its taste etc. also (by the sense of

taste), because (form) is limited (to being perceived by the sense ofsight); (even

s0,) it is not right to say that (the tree) is not perceived because it is not
perceived in all respects, as that is contrary to experience. In the same way, the
established view (here is that) Śiva is also known by means of (His) powers,

such as (Divine) Sound (nāda) and Light (bindu). That is said there itself (in

the Kiraṇa):

Juṣṭ as a tree is known by direct perception by means ofjust (its) form
alone (although its) taste and other (qualities) are not perceived, so too the Lord
is perceived according to (His) true nature independently of objectivity
(vastubhāva) by the power of knowledge (He and the fettered, as essentially

consciousness, possess).

‘ Lit. ‘just as a thought knows a treeʼ.

This verse is a condensed paraphrase of KiT vidyāpāda 9/12-13ab and 9/4-5 quoted
by Jayaratha in the commentary.
A tree can be perceived by means ofjust its colour or form, without one having
tasted its fruit etc. Eyen if all its parts are not perceived, it is nonetheless perceived.
Similarly, although Śiva is perceived by means of just one of His powers (such as

consciousness of Divine Sound or Light etc.), He is nonetheless entirely perceived.
“ KĪT vidyāpāda 9/12-13ab. Rāmakaṇṭha comments on the expression ‘vastvbhāva’ as

meaning knowledge of various empirical particulars, and so I have translated

TANTRĀLOKA


Again:

‘Light (bindu), (Divine) Sound and Power are conceived to be (present)

in the emptiness (of Śiva’s transcendental consciousness)in order to steady the
mind. Again, (when their experience becomes) permanent,®' (the mind becomes
completely) stable. (Śiva, Who)is beyond the senses because (He)is extremely
subtle,is present in (His) subtle power. That (power)is considered to be the
power of knowledge. By the knowledge of that, He Himself is known.
It is established (siddha) in this way that (Śiva’s) power alone is the

supreme means (upāya) to realise the supreme principle. The (implicit) sense

expressed (here) is that (Śiva's power) in the form of the world-orders etc. is of

endless kinds.
In this way, whatever be the wonderful diversity of this universe
consisting of sentient and insentient beings and the field of operation of
emanation and the rest or the states of waking etc., all that is the unfolding
expansion (sphāra) of the Supreme Lord’s power alone. Accordingly, he says:

j|ETÉĪṭIRÉIEETIGPVKIEĀḤ

ūttra zaz āglthcōrraT_ 1| 9¢
II

iḶBEEELEEIPI-IEE IEAETiE’THHIIṈLI

accordingly. Another possible translation could be: ‘Just as a tree is known by direct

perception (even if its) taste etc. is not perceived by (just perceiving) its form alone, in

the same way, by virtue of the fact that (the Lord and we possess) the power to perceive,
the Lord is perceived abstractly (tattvabhāvena) by setting aside (the perception of
empirically) existing things (vastubhāva).”
We come to know Śiva by setting aside our individual, objectivized

perceptions and attending instead to the fact that we are capable of perception,

recognising that this is a power Siva possesses as universal consciousness that He
imparts to us and in which we share. The point here is expressed beautifully by Rumi,

who teaches:

‘Do you want the sweetness of food

or the sweetness of the one who put sweetness in food?’
‘think not of what you see, rather give thanks to the One who gave you sight.’
Barks 2011: 290

“’Read with the edition of the KiT nitye for nityarṁ.

“” Instead of sūkṣmā śaktiḥ sa tadgataḥ, the edition of the KiT reads: sūkṣmaśaktilayaṁ
gataḥ — `(he has) merged into (his) subtle power°ʼ.

“ KIT vidyāpāda 9/4-5.
“ Read paramopāyaḥ for paramupāyaḥ.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


bahuśaktitvam asyoktaṁ śivasya yad ato mahān |
kalātattvapurārṇāṇupadādibhedaviṣṭaraḥ || 77 |I
sṛṣṭisthititrodhānasaṁhārānugrahādi ca |
turyam ity api devasya bahuśaktitvajrṛmbhitam || 78 II
jāgratsvapnasuṣuptāny atadatītāni yāny api |
tāny apy amuṣya nāthasya svātantryalaharībharaḥ || 79 |I
mahāmantreśamantreśamantrāḥ śivapurogamāḥ |
akalau sakalaś ceti śivasyaiva vibhūtayaḥ || 80 |I

““The many powers Śiva is said to possess are the great extension of

differentiation (bheda) (of the Paths of manifestation consisting of) the
cosmic forces (kalā), metaphysical principles (tattva), and world-orders
(pura), (along with their respective denotators, namely the Paths of the)

letters, Mantras, parts of Mantras (pada) and the rest. The unfolding of the

Lord’s manifold power (also consists of the processes of) creation,
persistence, obscuration, withdrawal and grace etc. as well as the Fourth

(state).

Moreover, (the states of) waking, dreaming and deep sleep and
others beyond them® are all the multitude of the waves of the Lord’s
(creative) freedom (svātantrya). So too (the perceivers) headed by Śiva

(called) the Great Lords of Mantra, the Lords of Mantra and Mantras,
(along with) the two that are Deconditioned (ākala) and the Conditioned
(sakala), are (all) the glorious powers (vibhūti) of Śiva Hiṃself. (77-80)

(78-81)

“ In these four verses, Abhinava gives a summary of the nature of Śakti as all the major
categories of existing things and their dynamism, ranging from the most gross and

immanent to transcendental Śiva. Thus, he lists the various categories (bheda) of
realities that comprise the universe which the teachings expound. They are: 1) the Sixfold Path 2) the five functions (pañcakṛtya), 3) the four states of consciousness, and 4)

the hierarchy of seven perceivers.

Read with MSs J, Jh, Ñ and T -padādibheda- for -padādir bheda-.

’ Concerning the waking and other states, see below, 10/227cd ff.

“ This subject is discussed extensively below in Chapter Nine (9/53cd-55ab, 90cd ff.
and 103) and all of Chapter Ten, an outline of which follows. According to a common
teaching found in various degrees of development in the early Siddhānta Āgamas and

fully formed in the Mālinīvijayottara, there are seven types of perceivers (pramātṛ)
arranged in a hierarchy along the series of thirty-six principles. In terms of the
phenomenology of the Pratyabhijñā, they are understood to view their corresponding

section of the series of principles as their objects. The first three are conditioned by the

‘Force (of limited agency) (kalā). This is the energy of Māyā, which obscures

consciousness in such a way that it reduces it to the form of perceiving subjects related

to objectivity experienced as separate from themselves. The first and lowest of these
categories of perceivers is subject to all the aspects of the Force (of limited agency) —

kalā — and so is called Sakala — ‘With Kalā’ — which I translate for convenience as
Conditioned. These perceivers experience the principles from Earth up to the Individual
soul, and are subject to all the three forms of Impurity (mala), namely, Innate (āṇava),

TANTRĀLOKA

Maāyā and Karma. The following two perceivers above that are still within the realms of
Maāyā. The first, the Pralayākala — Dissolution Deconditioned, resides in the priṇciples
from the Individual Soul to Māyā, that is, the obscuring coverings (kañcukas) of the
Individual Soul (see above, note to comm. 1/39-40). The one above it is called
Vijñānākala — Consciousness Deconditioned. This type of perceiver resides in the
intermediate state between Māyā and the Pure Principles, in which the remaining four

levels and types of perceivers reside.

The Dissolution Deconditioned (Pralayākala) perceivers are divested of the
active energies of Karma, but continue to possess the latent ones. They sleep for a

period of cosmic destruction (pralaya) and so are called accordingly. Their state of deep

sleep (suṣupti) is of two kinds, namely, with and without some sense of perception of
dream objects and the self-awareness that accompanies it. The first is called
‘savedyasuṣuptī’ — literally ‘deep sleep associated with objectivity°. The second is called
‘apavedyasuṣuptī — literally ‘deep sleep free of objectivity (see below, 9/138 ff. and
10/132cd ff.).. Although still within the phenomenal domain characterized by the

distinction between subject and object, no distinct phenomena appear (apavedya),

although the latent traces of the experience of objectivity of the previous Conditioned
(sakala) state of subjectivity persist. The Dissolution Deconditioned perceiver
‘associated with objectivity’ experiences just the bare cognitive awareness characterized
by the recollection, when emerging out of deep sleep, that “ḹ slept comfortably”. The
other type, which experiences deep sleep free of objectivity, recollects that “I knew
nothing at all” (see below, comm. 10/127cd-133ab). In the Consciousn

Deconditioned (Vijñānākala) perceiver, both impurities (mala) of Karma and Māyā
have come to an end as well as their latent impressions. The impurity pertaining to the
individual soul (āṇavamala) is still functional but is tending to cease (vidvaṁsabhāva).
Even so the presence of this impurity is evident in the state of the Consciousness

Deconditioned perceiver, who under its influence may be conscious but has no freedom,

or may be free but is unconscious of being so (see above, note to comm. on 1/23). The
yogi at this level of subjectivity enters a state of deep contemplative absorption
(samādhi) but, as if paralysed, he does not have the power to maintain it. When he
emerges out of it, he is again free, but he cannot sustain higher states of consciousness.

When the principle of Māyā is destroyed, the Dissolution Deconditioned
perceiver associated with objectivity (savedyapralayākala) enters into the
Consciousness Deconditioned state from which it does not, anyway, differ much.
Indeed, it appears that originally these categories of perceivers were considered to be
aspects of the Consciousness Deconditioned subjects. Both perceivers are destined to
awaken at the end of the period of cosmic destruction or its yogic equivalent. The
Dissolution Deconditioned, who were in objectless deep sleep, may return into the

world of transmigration of Maāyā, descending into it, according to the latent traces of

their past Karma, or rise to a higher level. Thus, for example, if they were devout
Vaiṣṇavas, they come to reside in their corresponding principle, that is, Unmanifest

Nature. Conversely, if they were previously engaged in the practice of Śaiva meditation
and other Śaiva spiritual disciplines, they may rise to the higher level of Mantra
perceivers beyond Māyā. Thuṣ, according to whether they descend or ascend, they are

of two kinds (see below, 9/138-141 and 10/133cd-137). The Consciousness
Deconditioned subject may similarly rise or fall when he awakens, but he rises further

and does not fall as far down as the Dissolution Deconditioned perceiver. Thus, he may

awaken at the higher level beyond Māyā to become a Mantra, Mantreśa (Lord of
Mantra) or Mahāmantreśa (Great Lord of Mantra). He may also return to the world of
transmigratory existence, but he does so as either as a yogi or as a man of knowledge
(vijñānin) (see below, 10/138-140ab).


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

The words ‘and the rest’ (in the expression) ‘parts of Mantras (pada)

and the restʼ refer to living beings (bhūta) and (all) phenomena (bhāva).

(Śiva’s) various (cosmic) functions (kṛtya) are mentioned by (saying) ‘creation,
persistenceʼ (and so on). ‘The Fourth’ is another way of referring to the full
(and perfect Śiva) nature present within (the phases of) emanation and the rest.
The Four-fold Reality (catuṣṭayārtha) (taught in the Krama system) is also
(implicitly) indicated by this (expression). Thus, obscuration and grace should
be included within persistence and withdrawal (respectively) to make that

possible. The Fourth (state) is other (than these phases).

Equivalent states may be achieved by yogic practice. Thus, the Dissolution
Deconditioned state is achieved by the yogi when the activity of mind, along with that
of the senses and even the breathing, stop in deep contemplative absorption (samādhi)
‘with the eyes closed’ (nimeṣa). If the adept (sādhaka) is sufficiently pure (that is, free
of latent traces of past Karma), he is able to quietly set aside that state, which is an
impediment to further development, and enter that of the Consciousness Deconditioned

perceiver. Rising beyond that level of subjectivity, the next, which is that of the Mantra
perceiver, is above Māyā, within the Pure Knowledge, the first of the Pure Principles, in

which objectivity is experienced as one in various modalities with the perceiver. There
fundamental impurity (āṇavamala) survives as a latent trace, and that too progressively
comes to an end in the higher perceivers, the Mantreśas and Mahāmantreśas, who reside
in the higher principles of ĪIśvara and Sadāśiva, respectively. It finally disappears totally
in Siva.
See Somadeva (2004: 145 ff.) for a detailed exposition of the doctrine as it
appears in the Mālinīvijayottara and the closely related Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha.
There he also discusses the differences with respect to the original form formulated in
the Siddhānta Āgamas and examines their presentation by early Siddhānta
commentators like Rāmakaṇṭha. Thuṣ, he traces its evolution to its most fully formed
formulation, which is found only in the Mālinīvijayottara.

There (in MV 1/22cd-23ab), we read that:

‘One should know that the Self is of four kinds. There (amongst them) is the

Vijñānakevala, who is conjoined to (just) one (form of) impurity. The Pralayakevala is
conjoined with that and Karma.

The four types of Self are: 1) those in the pure universe, free of the three forms

of impurity, 2) Vijñānakevala (‘remaining only in awarenessʼ), who are only affected by
the impurity of individuation (āṇavamala), 3) Pralayakevala (‘merged into nature’), who
are subject to that and Karma, and 4) the fully limited Self (sakala).
Somadeva notes that only the Parākhyatantra, which although amongst the
early Siddhāntāgamas is relatively late, mentions the Pralayākalas. They appear in the
(p. 166 note 62). Goodall notes (1998:184 footnote 77): ‘The first Saiddhāntika source
in which we find the terms Pralayākala and Vijñānākala is Sadyojyotiḥ’s
Svāyambhuvavṛtti ad 1/2 and 2/26 (in the second passage we find vijñānakevala in place
of the latter). The Kiraṇa speaks of the kevala type of soul (1/23), but does not subdivide it into these two categories.’

Sanderson observes (1996a: 23): ‘The source of the new terminology is
unclear. Jayaratha in his Tantrālokaviveka ad 10/7 considers it a Saiddhāntika

classification, and it was generally adopted in the Saiddhāntika circles; but I find no

Saiddhāntika scripture which uses it . . . In the absence of any early Saiddhāntika

evidence of the classification, I propose the hypothesis that the source lay in the
Mālinīvijayottara, . . . for there the terminology is central and pervasive’.

TANTRĀLOKA

The various states (of consciousness) are mentioned by (saying)
‘waking, dreaming’ (and so on). The two (perceivers who are) deconditioned

(akala)

(are

called)

‘Consciousness

Deconditioned’

(Vijñānākala)

and

‘Dissolution Deconditioned’ (Pralayākala). By that (is meant) the various types
of perceivers (pramātṛbheda).
In this way, Śiva, Who is ultimate reality and is one dense mass of
(uninterrupted) consciousness and bliss, abides thus as the one who impels and

gives life to the wonderfully diverse universe consisting of the thirty-six
principles. Accordingly, he says:

The Innate Nature of the Group (grāmadharma)”

ḍa #īī RJṬTITTaT] |

srīāāa fē zaṁaīēhcqa RṜTtTS 1| ¢z I
Somadeva, searching for the origins of the sets of perceivers, refers to the

Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha, which is ‘the source for much of the material that the MV
has adopted from the Śaivasiddhānta.’ There in the Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha there is
a division into three: 1) Amala (subdivided into Vidyeśvareśāna, Vidyeśvara and
Vidyā), 2) Kevala (mala but no kalā), 3) Sakala (mala and kalā). The subdivisions of 1
correspond to Mahāmantreśa, Mantreśa and Mantra. Somadeva wonders whether this
classification may have served as the basis of the one in the MV, which has simply

divided ʻkevala’ into two types. Sadyojyotis, commenting on this passage (i.e. Svā. 1/2)
practically presents the view in the MV. It is quite likely that this was Sadyojyotis'’s

source (see Somadeva (2004) p. 167-169 for more details). Somadeva (2004) (p. 177-8)
notes: “The Mālinīvijayottara’s innovation to the pramātṛbheda is therefore the

subdivision of Svāmbhuvasutrasaṁgraha’s isolated soul into the Vijñānākala and the

Pralayākala. The exact source from which the Mālinīvijayottara has adopted these
experients is unclear. For Abhinavagupta the Pralayākala are the ‘liberated’ souls of the
Vaiṣṇavas, Brahmavādins (Vedāntins) and Buddhists, and the Vijñānākalas are the souls
‘liberated’ by isolation according to the Sāṁkhya, Yoga and Pāñcarātra Systems. But it
is not impossible that experients approximating to both the Vijñānākala and the
Pralayākala existed under different names in various schools of the early Sāṁkhya and
Yoga.' He is referring here more specifically the Videhas (> Vijñānākala) and
Prakṛtilaya (> Pralayākala) mentioned in some works on Pātañjali Yoga and Sāṁkhya

(Yogasūtra 1/19 and Vyāsa’s bhāṣya).” Somadeva (2004) (p. 173-176) searches for
earlier non-Saiddhāntika sources for this view and finds the notion of Videha and
Prakṛtilaya Yogins in higher states of samādhi mentioned in Vyāsa’s bhāṣya on YSū
1/19 and Bhoja’s commentary Rājamārtaṇḍa ad YSū 1/19 and 1/17.

Concemning

the

Four-fold

Reality,

also

called

the

Four-fold

Sequence

(kramacatuṣṭaya), taught in the the Krama system, see note to TĀv ad 3/256ab (3/256).
Here Jayaratha presents the Four-fold Reality as essentially consisting of the three
phases of emanation, persistence, withdrawal and a fourth condition that encompasses
them and is present within them, even as it transcends them. This is the eternal, nontemporal consciousness manifest as and through time in these three phases, in each
timeless instant. Undefinable as any one of them, it is appropriately called the
Inexplicable (Anākhya) or No Name (Anāma). In this setup, taught in the Krama
system, obscuration is an aspect of the phase of persistence, and grace that of

withdrawal.

“) This passage extends from TĀ 1/81 (82) to 85ab (86ab).


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


tattvagrāmasya sarvasya dharmaḥ syād anapāyavān |
ātmaiva hi svabhāvātmety uktaṁ śrītriśiromate || 81 ||

It is ṣaid in the venerable Triśiromata that the (essential) nature
(dharma) of the (entire) group (grāma) of metaphysical principles (tattva) is

imperishable. Indeed, it is the Self alone who is the identity of their own

nature (svabhāvātman). (81)

An attribute (dharma) is of two kinds, namely, (one that) bestows life

(i.e. gives existence) (prāṇada) to an entity (padārtha), and (the other that) is

the cause of (its) assuming (particular features or) qualities (viśeṣa). The first is
like a universal. A cow is not a cow without ‘cow-nessʼ. The second is like a
(particular) quality (guṇa). (The colour) ‘white’, for example, qualifies an entity
that has attained being. In this way, here (in this context) ‘the Self alone of the

(entire) group (grāma) of metaphysical principles (tattva) gives it life (i.e.

existence) (prāṇada), and so is the ‘aṭṭribute’ which is the essential nature (of

the group). Thus, it is said to be ‘imperishable’, that is, it is never disassociated

(from it). The word ‘indeed’ (indicates) the reason (for this). Surely, (a question
arises as to) what the authority (pramāṇa) is here (for this view). With this

doubt in mind, he says that ‘it is said in the venerable Triśiromata’.
A scripture functions in two ways —— as word and meaning (that is, as
what is written, word for word, and its sense, which may be variously
expressed). Referring to that same book, he says in both ways (that is, by
literally quoting from it and summarizing the meaning):

hṛdiṣthaṁ sarvadehasthaṁ ṣvabhāvasthaṁ suṣūkṣmakam ḷ

sāmūhyaṁ caiva tattvānāṁ grāmaśabdena kīrtitam || 82 |

The extremely subtle totality (sāmiūthya) of the principles located in

the Heart, in all the body, and in the specific nature (svabhāva) (of all

things), is termed the ‘group’ (grāma). (82)

“! Now that Abhinava has established on the authority of Siddhānta sources the

existence and nature of Śakti in its manifold forms, he turns to a major Trika Tantra, the
Triśirobhairava, to say the same in the ambit of the Trika Kula. The point of contact
between them is the term ‘dharma’. According to the standard esoteric nomenclature of
the Kaula Tantras and their Buddhist counterparts, in the Anuttarayoga the term
grāmadharma is used to refer to the antinomian conduct of elevated Kaula Tantric

adepts. In common Sanskrit, the word grāmadharma or grāmyadharma literally means
‘rustic or vulgar behaviour’, that is, the way an uneducated, low-caste villager behaves

who takes no heed of basic Brahminical norms that regulate the right conduct of the

higher castes. In Buddhist Tantras it denotes the spiritual practice of adhering externally

to common ‘vulgar behaviour whilst inwardly repeating Mantras and focusing the

TANTRĀLOKA

The ‘totality (of the principles) is the group (of principles). The word
‘grāma’ (that can also mean ‘village’) functions (in this context) in the sense of
‘a groupʼ. (This is an acceptable interpretation) because one can observe this
usage in such statements as: ‘its nature is the entire group (grāma) of principles
that has been swallowed up ”.” And that is present everywhere in two ways,
that is, externally and within the body, as universal (common to all)
(sādhāraṇa) (externally), and as particular (not common to all) (asādhāraṇa)
(within the body). This is the meaning. Thus, it is located in the fixed, specific
nature of mobile (living) and immobile (insentient things) etc. So too, in the

same way, it is located within the ‘Heart’, that is, within consciousness
(bodha), shining radiantly at one with it. Thuṣ, it is ‘extremely subtle’, that is,
it cannot be discerned (aparicchedya).
(The essential inherent) attribute (dharma) of this group of principles

(tattvagrāma) is not the contracted (individual) Self, rather, it is the supreme

one. Accordingly, he says:

sṃīāa srī scqṣ: fTaīgaúaz:
ātmaiva dharma ity uktaḥ śivāmṛtapariplutaḥ |
Itis said that (the inherent) nature (dharma) (of the ‘group’)

(unconditioned) Self itself, flooded with Śiva’s nectar. (83ab) (84ab)

is the

The meaning (of the expression) ‘flooded with Śiva’s nectar’ is that
(the group of principles) is made of the aesthetic rapture (camatkāra) of
supreme bliss. He also indicates in this way that it is the supreme goal°
(upeya), and so one should pay close attention (to it) just there.

What is the means here (in this case) by which it can be experienced
directly? He says (in response to this question):

JG-TvṬJṀkrṁ

attention on higher spiritual principles. See HT 2/3/41 also Advayasiddhi 14, and
Cittaśuddhiprakaraṇa 58.
The Triśirobhairavatantra similarly explains the term in an elevated way as the
dharma of the grāma — ‘the groupʼ. This is not the group of houses or families that

make up a village, but rather the metaphysical principles that constitute the gamut of
reality. Dharma is the essential attribute (dharma) of these principles, that is, the Self.

Thus, the practice, simply stated, is to stay immersed and satisfied in the Self (see

below, 29/65). Thus, Abhinava links the common basic Śaivism of the Siddhānta to the

eṣoteric Kaulism of Trika, mediated by the concept of Śakti.
“ This line is probably drawn from the TBh. The expression ‘kavalīkṛta’, here
translated as ‘consumed, literally means ‘made into a morsel’ ready to be gulped down.
The literal meaning thus suggests the process whereby the dispersed particulars and

their common underlying universal metaphysical principles are gathered together into
consciousness to be consumed as a unity into the oneness of consciousness.

““ Read paramopeyaḥ for paramupeyaḥ.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


[EIENEESCAPHNEAEEIGIEETCTHIIṈ®AI

aa Jāatd |

prakāśāvasthitaṁ jñānaṁ bhāvābhāvādimadhyataḥ || 83 ||
svasthāne vartanaṁ jñeyaṁ draṣṭrtvaṁ vigatāvṛti |
viviktavastukathitaśuddhavijñānanirmalaḥ || 84 ||
grāmadharmavṛrttir uktas tasya sarvaṁ prasiddhyati |
One should know that the abiding (of consciousness) within its own
abode is the knowledge (of reality) (jūāna) present in the Light (of
consciousness that shines) in the centre between (any two things,) such as
the existence and non-existence (of any one thing). (One should know that)
it is (the pure) subjectivity (draṣṭṛtva) from which (every obscuring)
covering has fallen away.
Stainless by virtue of (that) pure consciousness, which is said to be a
separate (transcendental) reality (viviktavastu), it is called (the state of)
‘abiding within the state of the nature of the (knowledge of the) group
(grāmadharmavṛtti. He who possesses (that state) achieves everything.
(83cd-85ab) (84cd-86ab)
By the words ‘and the like’ (one should understand any particular)

‘existent’ (bhāva) also. Thus, (the meaning is that the light of consciousness

shines) in the centre between the existence and non-existence (of any one thing),

or between (the perception of) two things (bhāva). “One should know’ that the

‘abiding’ (of consciousness) within its own abode, that is, in its persistent state

(sthiti), is the ‘knowledge (of reality) (jñāna) that, taking its support from (the

centre), ‘is present in the light (of consciousness)’, that is, within is its own
(subjective) nature, not within (objectivity, which comprises both) existence,
non-existence and the like. The meaning is that one should know the manner of
abiding (vṛrt) within the domain (viṣaya) of ‘the nature of the groupʼ
(grāmadharma).

The overall sense here is this. When (one is) perceiving two existent
things or the existence (of one thing, conscious of the concomitant) nonexistence (of other things), perceiving the centre, which is the void that divides
“ The expression viviktavastu literally means ‘a separate reality.

Grāma is the knowledge of reality within the light of consciousness. It is the pure
subjectivity free of the obscuration of objectivity that shines as ‘a separate reality, the

centre between two perceptions. The first, that exists and is taking place, and the second,

which is yet to come into existence. As attention moves from one object to another, the
second displaces the first, thus shifting it into the non-existence, which is its cessation.
The yogi who abides in the centre between their existence and non-existence abides in
pure transcendental consciousness. As the sky does the earth, although separate from
them, it encompasses all things. This is the Centre between inhalation and exhalation,

subject and object, the light of consciousness and its reflective awareness. The yogi
abides in all levels of practice in the centre, participating in the dynamic state (vr7ti),
perfect in all respects, of the ‘attribute of the groupʼ, that is, the knowledge of the

Totality.

TANTRĀLOKA

the two (from one another), and having simultaneously abandoned that
existence and non-existence etc., he whois attentive comes to abide there itself
within the supreme goal, whichis the supreme Self flooded with Śiva’s nectar.

Thatis said (in the Vijñānabhairava):


‘Having known (jñātvā) (and concentrated on (dhyātvā)) two things

(or states), one should rest in the centre between both of them within (pure

thought-free) consciousness (jñāna).°’ Having abandoned both simultaneously,

Reality shines in the centre.’

“ VBh 61. The printed edition of the VBh reads dhyātvā — ‘having concentrated (on)
for jñātvā — having known’. Biumer translates as follows: ‘Meditating on the

knowledge of two things or states one should rest in the middle. By abandoning both

simultaneously, the Reality shines forth in the centre. Swami Lakshmanjoo explains:
‘Just take any two pots or two things; meditate on any two objects, for instance this case
of spectacles and this paper. Concentrate on these two objects and reside and rest in

between these two objects. When you perceive this object and after perceiving this

object, you perceive this paper. When you perceive this object and this act is over and
perceiving of this paper has not begun; that is madhyama [the centre]; that is the ‘in

between’. Fix your consciousness there, on madhya [the centre]. . . While concentrating

on that centre, be established in that centre. When you are established in
i that centre
simultaneously leave the impression of these two objects; you have to take support
every now and then of these two objects . . . The centre will disappear and you have to
take the support of these objects again and again. See this and see that and see what is in
between and when that centre is established well then you have to discard impressions
of both objects and be established in the centre and then the universal centre will be
revealed. This is śāktopāya.
At the same time when you breathe in and breathe out take the support of

breathing in and breathing out to establish your centre. When the centre [between] these
two breaths is well established, then leave the breath aside and enter in that centre and
the universal centre will be revealed.”
““’ VBh 61. I transḷate the word ‘jāna’ here as ‘consciousnessʼ, although it literally

means knowledge. The ‘knowledge’ meant here and in the verses from the
Triśirobhairava quoted here is free of thought constructs (nirvikalpakajñāna). Thīs type

of ‘knowledge’ is contrasted with the one that is accompanied by thought constructs
(savikalpājñāna). Perception moves from one to the other. The identification of an

object as a table or a chair is a thought construct that is formed by differentiating a
particular object from all others that are not tables or chairs and comparing that
particular object with other tables and chairs previously identified (one could say
labelled) as such. This does not mean that the world we experience is solely constituted

of these thought constructs and so, like a dream, although it appears, is not real. This is
not the Trika view, based on the Pratyabhijñā, although it may well be that of the
Vijñānabhairava. Consciousness, as we have seen, manifests freely as all things, and so

too as the thought constructs that accompany their perception as individual, particular

things. Nothing that appears is unreal, including thought constructs. All things manifest

according to their nature. Even so, the world perceived through thought constructs is
one of countless particulars, each with their own fixed, determined nature. Variously
reḷated in time and space to one another, they are also cut off from one another. This is
the perspective of duality and relative distinctions. This is the knowledge we have of
things accompanied by thought constructs (savikalpakajñāna). It is centred on them as
individual entititss. This would not be possible if there were no underlying
consciousness, which is one and universal. This is the pure undivided Light of


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘When one thing has been abandoned (tyakte), and consciousness has
been (firmly) checked, it should not move on to something else. Then
transcendental contemplation (atibhāvanā) blossoms forth, by virtue of the

state

(free

of

thought

(tanmadhyabhāvena).”

constructs)

in

the

centre

(between

them)

consciousness which illumines and makes all things, including the thought constructs,
manifest. This consciousness free of thought constructs (nirvikalpakajñāna) shines in

the centre between one thought and the next, revealing itself to be the one ultimately
real nature of all things.

““ Read vikasaty atibhāvanā for vikasatyati bhāvanā.
““’ VBh 62. Swami Lakshmanjoo explains: ‘Keep two objects [in front of you], do not
look at these two objects simultaneously. Go on looking at one single object with live

consciousness, with full awareness. Go on looking at this object and when you are

aware of that, when you perceive it well, leave it. Try to find another object, do not
look
at it; leave this object, to perceive another object, but do not go to the other object
yet.
When you leave this object and you do not reach another object yet, you travel only up

to that, up to another object, do not enter the kingdom of another object. Leave the
kingdom of the previous object, but do not enter in the kingdom of another object, roam
in the centre. . . . [There] the supreme state of God-consciousness blossoms forth.”

(2007: 82-84)

The manuscripts of the VBh contain more meaningful variant readings than
manuscripts of most other texts. So much so that the Sansṣkrit commentat
or

Śivopādhyāya refers to variant readings on several occasions in his commentary and

even comments on them separately. Occasionally Swami Lakṣhmanjoo does the same.
In this case, he explains that by adopting the reading atyakte for tyakte and
tanmayabhāvena for tanmadhyabhāvena, a different meditation (dhāraṇā) is taught
in

this verse, which would then be translated thus:

‘When, without abandoning one thing (atyakte), consciousness has been
(firmly) checked, one should not move on to something else. Then transcenden
tal
contemplation (atibhāvanā) blossoms forth, by being one with it (tanmayabhāvena).”

Swami Lakshmanjoo explains: ‘“One dhāraṇā [meditation] is just to look at a
pot. . . Do not think of any other thing. . . Go on concentrating on that pot
only. . .

Your thought must be established in that one object, in objective consciousness. Do not
8go to another object. Keep your consciousness alive. It must not be dead. When you are

tired of seeing it again and again, your consciousness is dead and your consciousness
wants to see another object because you want to see something new. But do not
do that;
it must not be dead. . . You must keep it alive for the time being. You must not,
at any
cost, go to another object. . . Then you will become one with that object, objective

consciousness melts in your subjective consciousness. The mixture of that particular

objective consciousness and your particular subjective consciousness of the object

only

enters in universal consciousness.”
Śivopādhyāya, the author of one of the two surviving Sanskrit commentaries,

comments on three variant readings. Thus, in the place of tyakte (‘abandonedʼ),
the text
he adopts reads nyakte (‘when removed°). He also refers to the variants vyakte (‘when
manifest’) and avyakte (‘when unmanifest?). Thus, he writes:
‘‘when removed’ (nyakte) means ‘when concealed’. When an entity or thing
which is an object of visualization (such as a deity), whose form has, for example,
four
arms and three eyes, is not seen, when it is ‘concealed’ and ‘consciousnessʼ,
i.e.,
sentient awareness, is ‘checkedʼ, that is, by the skill that comes from practice has
been
completely blocked; having done so (the visualized object) is well installed
(in

TANTRĀLOKA

(The words) ‘one should know’ should be applied (twice,) in accord

with the maxim of the eye of a crow. Thus ‘one should know (this) abiding
(of consciousness) as well as one should know the ‘subjectivity° which is the
direct experience of supreme reality and, moreover ‘from which (every

obscuring) covering has fallen away°”' 1) The external covering consisting of
existence, non-existence and the rest ‘has fallen awayʼ, that is, ceased. Thus (the
subjectivity, the covering) of which (has ended,) is devoid of the limitations

(avaccheda) of an external location and the like. 2) Again, the ‘obscuring
coveringʼ, which is the differentiation (kalanā) engendered by time, (both)

supreme and inferior, ‘has fallen away’ and ceased (and so the subjectivity the

covering) of which (has ended,) is undifferentiated by time (akālakalita). Thīs is

the meaning. That is said (in the Triśirobhairava):
‘Inferior (apara) time is up to the sixteenth. The supreme one (para) is
the seventeenth. The time which is beyond the supreme, O beloved, is the
Lord, Who is the eighteenth. Once the one time has been fashioned three-fold

within the vital breath, one should abandon it again.”

consciousness). ‘It should not move on to something else’, that is, to another thing such

as a jar, the body of which has been perceived. . . In the case of the reading bhāve vyakte
‘when a thing is manifest’, or if the letter ‘a is added (to make) avyakte ((when a thing
is) ‘unmanifest°). The meaning is just the same as stated before. In this way, in the case
of (the practice of) Yoga (i.e. meditation) with support (it is said):

‘Having abandoned progressively the mind, whose sole field (of operation is)
the object of meditation, meditation and the one who meditates, the contemplative

absorption (that arises) is said to be like (the flame of) a lamp (in a place) without wind.”
Once having abandoned meditation and the one who meditates, in accord with
the teaching of the treatises on yoga (yogaśāstra), because the goal is repose in the
Central Abode which is devoid of the support of the object of meditation, (the yogi's)
contemplation (bhāvanā), which is the purification (saṁskāra) (that takes place by)
repose in the state in the centre, ‘blossoms forth’ to a most excellent degree (atiśayena),

that is, is intensely. (This happens) ‘by virtue of the state in the centre between the two

conditions (bhāva), namely, manifest and unmanifest, by resting in the Central Abode,
the nature of which is something (indefinable). Thus, the meaning is that there would be
a state of repose in the centre, the nature of which is the pure consciousness of the one
perceiver who contemplates and conjoins (anusaṁdhātṛ) those two, as the one who
pervades the condition (daśā) at the beginning, middle and end of the two states,

manifest and unmanifest.

“’ In other words, ‘one should know the abiding (of consciousness) in its own abode’

and ‘one should know the subjectivity (drastrtva) (present there)’. Concering the
maxim of the eye of a crow, see above, note 1,88.

“ Jayaratha now explains the nature of these coverings in terms of the three parameters

that specify objectively perceived particulars, namely that there are three kinds of
coverings — those related to location, time and form.

“ For parāparas tu read with MSs Ch, N, T, D: parāt paras tu.

“’ These lines appear to be drawn from the 7riśirobhairavatantra. Quoted by Jayaratha
without further explanation, they are mysterious. It seems that Jayaratha assumed that
his readers would have access to the text or that they would be given an explanation by
a teacher. It is possible that the text is referring to three forms, aspects or developments
of the emissive power (visargaśakti) of consciousness, symbolized by the sixteenth,

seventeenth and eighteenth digit of the Moon. Abhinava refers to three types of
utterances of viṣarga — normal, short and very short — and correlates them with the


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

3) Similarly, (the subjectivity) from which ‘the (obscuring) covering

consisting of the eleven parts (pada) ‘has fallen away’ is devoid of the

particular forms, Brahmā and the rest, that are fixed (and ordained) by it.™ As
is said:

‘That (Vidyā with) eleven parts moves continuously within the vital
breath. (They are) the letters A, U and M along with the Point, the Half Moon,
the Obstructress, Sound, End of Sound, Power, the Pervasive One and the Equal

One which is considered to be the eleventh."

Thus (this supreme subjectivity) is the subject who is undivided from

the Transmental (which is the twelfth stage beyond these eleven), and its

defining characteristic is the direct experience of supreme reality. This is the
meaning in a nutshell. That is said (in the following line):
‘The Transmental is beyond that, and beyond that is the Untainted

(Absolute — nirāmaya).”"

Thus the ‘reality° which is separate from every specific location, time

and form and (so) is devoid of conditioning limitations (avaccheda) is the

Supreme Principle which is the great (universal) Being (mahāsattā) (of all

highest level of aesthetic enjoyment (PTv pp. 46-48). Below, Abhinava quotes a pasṣsage

from the TBh (see below 3/139ab (3/138) ff.) that refers to the seventeenth digit as the
quiescent, potential

form of Kuṇḍalinī — Śaktikuṇḍalinī — which,

resting

in

consciousness as pure ‘nectar’, does not emit. The sixteenth digit is the active form of
emission as the Kuṇḍalinī of the cosmic breath (prāṇakuṇḍalinī). According to the
passage we are examining, the eighteenth is the emission that encompasses both aspects,

quiescent and emergent. The three are related in some way to the breathing. Possibly,

the sixteenth lower form is in the inhaled breath (apāna), the supreme in the exhaled
(prāṇa) and the middling one in the centre between them, where the movement of the

breath rests. As we shall see in detail in Chapter Six, the movement of the breath is
coordinated with the flux of time. Thus, it seems that according to this passage the

emissions of the breath correspond to three aspects or forms of time. Thus pure, eternal
consciousness shines free of the obscuration of time when the breath, charged with the
energies that impel it and generate time, has been ‘abandoned’ and the yogi realises his

essential, unobscured conscious nature.

’ Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara gover the three audible phonemes of the syllable
OM. Thus, Brahmā marks the first in the series of eleven levels of OM mentioned in the

passage that follows.

Here they are presented as degrees of obscuration of

consciousness. As the vital breath ascends, conveying the contracted consciousness of
the individual soul with it, they decrease until on the twelfth level — the Transmental —

consciousness shines ‘free of obscuration’.
“’ SYT 4/254cd-256ab.
“’ SVṬ 4/256cd. We have already encountered this series of stages of the ascent of the
sound of the syllable OM. See above, TĀv ad 1/61¢d-62 (62cd-63), also below, TĀv ad

1/187cd-188ab and 5/56cd-57ab etc. See Appendix to this chapter for a detailed account
of the stages of Sound. See also Ś/56cd-57ab 6/161-162 and notes etc, 8/383cd-385ab

(383-384), 8/425ab (424cd) 23/37-38, TĀv ad 29/156cd-157ab, and 29/160cd-161ab.

See also Torella 1979b p. 69, note 11, Dyczkowski 1992a: 252-255, Dupuche 2003: 62-

64, Padoux1990: 408.

TANTRĀLOKA

things).” ‘It is said’ there (about that) in all the scriptures without exception

that it is ‘stainless by virtue of (that) pure consciousness’ which is the
reflective awareness of supreme ‘I’ (consciousness). ‘(The state of) abiding

within ‘the attribute of the group’ (grāmadharmavṛtti)’ is one in which all

bondage has been rendered insignificant by the attainment of oneness with that.

(This accords with) what is said (in scriptures, where we read that) ‘Bhairavī

obtained it from Bhairava . . . etc.” This and the remaining statement has also
been said by our teachers. This is Śrīkaṇṭha’s teaching (uki).’’ That is said
there (in the Triśirobhairava in a passage) beginning with:

““I will explain the fourth one in association with the attribute of the
group. . . . ‘The extremely subtle totality (sāmūḥya) of the principles

residing in the Heart, in all the body, and in the specific nature (svabhāva)
(of all things), is termed the ‘group’ (grāma). It is said that (the inherent)

“T The fifth or sixth century philosopher of language, Bhartṛhari, who was an important
source for Utpaladeva’s Pratyabhijñā, makes a fundamental distinction between a

‘superimposed’ or ‘metaphorical’ Being (upacārasattā), which is a correlate and

function of language, and an absolute reality and identity he calls mahāsattā (Great
Being), ātman (Self) and svabhāva (essential nature), which is the condition and ground

of language itself. Thus Bhartṛhari writes:

‘Itis Being (sattā) which, being differentiated according to the object in which
it is present, is called the universal. All words are based on that. This is the meaning of

the stem (ofa word) and of the root; it is eternal, it is the great soul . . . (VP 3/1733-34;

trans. Iyer 1971: 25-26. See Halbfass 1992: 91-92).


Utpaladeva uses the same term to describe the supreme level of Speech:

‘(The power of) consciousness (citi) is reflective awareness. It is Supreme
Speech that arises spontaneously. That is the (supreme) primary (mukhya) freedom and
sovereignty of the Supreme Self. It is the radiant pulse (sphurattā) (of the Light of

consciousness), the great (universal) Being (of all things), unspecified by place or time.

As the essence (of consciousness) it is said to be the Heart of the Supreme Lord.” ĪP
1/5/13-14.
Kaw (1967: 99, 100) writes concerning sattā that it ‘is the highest reality
(paramārtha) which is the characteristic of the Supreme Spirit, Śiva. The sattā of
insentient objects, like the earth or stones, liesin their manifestation (sphuradrāpatā hi
sattā sphuradrūpatā ca prakāśamānatā — [the effulgent form (of consciousness) is
Being and the effulgent form (of consciousness) is the manifest state (of things). D. The
essence of Being understood this way is the power (śakti) of consciousness.” See
Utpaladeva’s commentary on ŚDṛ 4/6.

Read

bhairavyā

for

bhairavīṁ.

This

quarter

verse,

drawn

from

the

Siddhayogīśvarīmata referring to its own transmission, is quoted as part of a long
passage belowin TĀv ad 36/1-7ab. See note there. One would expect the scripture here

to be the Triśirobhairava.

’ Śrīkaṇṭha is the form of Śiva who teaches the 7risirobhairava, that Jayaratha now
goes on to quote. Jayaratha, it seems, takes him to be a historical person.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


attribute (dharma) (of the ‘group’) is indeed the (unconditioned) Self. This
is said to be the ‘attribute of the groupʼ (grāmadharma).
One should know that the abiding (of consciousness) within its own
abode is the knowledge (of reality) (jñāna) that is present in the Light (of
consciousness). ‘Abiding’ is said to be the state (vṛtti) (of the group). Once
having known that (this) state is one’s own abode (svapada), one discovers
subjectivity (draṣṭrtva).
One should know that it is well awake (prabuddha) and devoid of
external coverings. Free of supreme and inferior (time) and free of the eleven
(lower) levels, the knowledge (of reality) (jñāna) in the Self within one’s own
Self is flooded with Śiva’s nectar. Stainless by virtue of (that) pure

consciousness which is said to be a separate (transcendental) reality
(iviktavastu), it is called (the state of) abiding within ‘the attribute of the
groupʼ (grāmadharmavṛtti) iṇ ṭhis Tantra and is elevated (udita) in all
respects.”


And that same (Tantra continues with the words beginning with):


`Or else, the adept who knows the supreme reality and then desires (to
atṭain) Śiva . . .’ and ending with: ‘one should cultivate the stable state (sthiti)
which is established in (the supreme) reality (tattvasthā), endowed with the
Light of the power of the centre.”

The author, by stating in a nutshell the sense of the end of that passage,
wishing to present the subsequent passage (grantha), adds his own words,

namely: “He who possesses (that state) achieves everything.' The meaning is

that one who abides within ‘the nature of the group’ and has attained oneness
with the supreme power (of consciousness) by entering the Central Abode (that
is, suṣumnā) by deṣtroying the movement of the exhaled and inhaled breath
(prāṇa and apāna) ʻ‘achieves everything’, that is, perceives (everything)
whether external or internal as consisting of the most excellent oneness with

Śiva. That is said (in the following verse):

‘Once the mind of daily fettered life (sarisṛti)° has been bound by the

medicinal herb of meditation on Śiva, when it is directed (to anything, be it
even) a piece of wood or a wall, like the alchemical potion (rasa), (it transforms
it into) the golden state of Śiva.”

Thus, he says:


“ MS K reads: ātmaiva dharma ity ukto grāmo dharma prakīrtitaḥ | It is said that it is
the Self itself which is (the essential) nature (dharma) (of this group). The group is said
to be the attribute.”

! The expression viviktavasṭu lierally means ‘a separate reality°.
+ = 82-83a (83-84°) = 83cd-84a (84cd-85a) = 83b (84b) = 84cd-85a
(85ab-86a).

Read with MSs Ch, J, Jh, Ñ, and D sarsṛteh for saṁṣṛte.

TANTRĀLOKA

Established in Rāma (rāmastha)

ūrdhvaṁ tyaktvādho viśet sa rāmastho madhyadeśagaḥ | 85 ||

Having abandoned the ‘upper’ (exhaled breath), the ‘lower”

(inhaled breath) should enter (the Middle Channel). He who is established

in Rāma (rāmastha) resides in the middle place. (85cd) (86cd)

The ‘upperʼ is the exhaled breath (prāṇa), (so called) because it
transports upwards. The ‘lower’ is the inhaled breath (apāna), (so called)
because it transports downwards. ‘Having abandoned’, that is, interrupted that

movement (tadgati), ‘he’ (the yogi) who abides within ‘the nature of the
groupʼ, ‘should enter’” the Middle Channel. How is he? He ‘resides in the

middle placeʼ. The energy located there in the middle of the Middle Channel

has the (extremely subtle) form of a Iotus fibre and the place of that (energy) is
just one (ekadeśa), that is, the inner Void (antarvyoman). That (is the place in

which the yogi resides,) to which he goes, that is, knows, and he is established

there with one pointed determination. That is said (in the Vijñānabhairava):
‘The Middle Channel is situated in the middle (between the two
breaths) in (an extremely subtle) form like a lotus fibre. Having meditated on

that as the Goddess Who is the inner Void, the God is made manifest
(prakāśate) by Her.'

This passage extends from TĀ 1/85cd (86cd)- 89cd (90cd).
“ The word ‘rāma’ is derived from the root ram which means to delight or enjoy. It

denotes the Supreme Self (paramātmā) characterized as Rāma, ‘the enjoyer, who sports

with the cosmic varety, sentient and insentient, delighting within himself. Thus, one

who is ‘rāmastha’ is established in ‘rāma’, the Supreme Self who, delighted, plays.
Rāma, the well-known incarnation of Viṣṇu, is not meant here.

One could also translate tadgatiḥ as ‘that condition’, i.e. the state of the breath in
which it flows up and down.

“ Ṛead iti for itī.

“ Read as in the edition of the VBh madhyasaṁsthā for madhyasaṁstha-.

] take the word devyā to be the common aiśa form of the word devī. Cf. the name of
the Tantra Devyāyāmala for Devīyāmala.

“ Liṭerally: ‘illuminedʼ.

’! VBh 35. The Middle Channel is suṣumnā (also, occasionally spelt correctly —
suṣumṇā). Extremely subtle, it is commonly said to be as fine as a lotus fibre. A line
without thickness, like the Point (bindu) without size, it marks the boundary between the

finite body and the infinite expanse of transcendental consciousness, and so represents

the Deity or the state of the supreme perceiver (parapramātṛbhāva). Not an object, it
can only be known by its own inherent power of self-awareness. Thus, Swami
Lakshmanjoo (2002: p. 36-37) explains: ‘There is no agency other than the madhyanāḍī
(the Middle Channel), that central path. Your individual consciousness will not reach
there. It is a state of consciousness that is realized by the consciousness of that state. It is
not realized by another agency. There is no other agency working there.' Known only to

Himself by Himself, Siva, the transcendental Void of consciousness, is realized by the

grace of the Goddess, the power of the Void.” Śivopādhyāya comments: ‘The Middle
Channelʼ is called ‘suṣumnā’. It is ‘situated in the middle’, that is, in the middle of the


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Thus, he is said to be ‘established in Rāma (rāmastha)ʼ. ‘Rāma’ is

the Supreme Self Who resides there (in the Centre) and shines radiantly with
that form. According to the teaching that begins with: “ do not play (and

experience delight) (ramāmi) aloneʼ; as the wonderful variety of all things,

he plays (and is delighted) as the nature of every single sentient and insentient

thing. This is the meaning. That is said in the 7riśirobhairavatantra:

‘Attending to the upper and lower (flows of the breath), one whose

mind is fixed on (the state) that arises from the exhaled and inhaled breath,
having abandoned the upper (exhalation), should enter (the Centre,) and so he is

established here in Rāma.

heart. This is the syntax. ‘Having meditated on’ that as being like a lotus fibre because it

iṣ extremely subtle, that is, having thought of the inner Sky which is the Sky of

consciousness within it, God is illumined by the goddess who is such. Within the
Middle Channel there is a Void which is the inner Sky of consciousness. The energy of

the vital breath flows forth from that. By (cultivating this) awareness, the Light is

produced (prādurbhāva). Or else (another explanation is that) the first line can read

either as ‘the Middle Channel is situated in the middle and its form is like a lotus fibre’
or else ‘the Middle Channel is in the form of lotus fibre that is in the middle. This is a

compound in which both parts can be the adjective (qualifying the other part). God is

illumined by that power of the vital breath which is of this kind as the Sky which is

contemplated (cintita) in the middle of it.’

“ Read evokto for evoktaṁ.
“ This statement is probably a citation from the TBh.

Entry into the centre takes place with the flow of inhalation. The inhaled breath

absorbed into the consciousness of the Centre brings the condition of the breath in

which it moves outwardly to a halt. Translating Abhinava’s concise paraphrase of this

verse literally, it appears that he explains how the yogi enters the Centre, namely:

‘having abandoned the ‘upper’, he should enter below. The yogi who successfully

practices the self-awareness here termed ‘abiding in the groupʼ, his attention firmly

fixed on his subjectivity, enters into the Centre between the breaths by abandoning the
upward flowing breath (prāṇa). The yogi experiences his essential identity with Śiva

when all that is external and internal is in a state of oneness (sāmarasya) with His
supreme power. This is achieved by entering the Central Abode (mmadhyadhāman) when
the flux of the breathing (prāṇa — exhalation and apāna — inhalation) halts. The ‘centre
in this case is suṣumnā, the channel (nāḍī) in the centre between the channels that

convey the upward and downward moving flux of the two breaths. Here yogis
experience the pure energy (sakti) of consciousness in the form of a fine filament of
light. Here, in the centre between Being and Nonbeing, yogis experience a progressive
expansion of consciousness upward and inward which passes through the eleven phases
(padaikādaśika) of the inner utterance of Orṁ within suṣumnā. These range from the
letter A to the Equal One (samanā). Beyond that is the Transmental (unmanā) which,

transcending time, space and form, is the reflective awareness of the supreme subject.
Beyond spatial relations, itis said to be the inner Void. Experiencing this Emptiness, the
yogi is ‘established in delight (rāmastha) of cosmic consciousness, playing, as it were,

by being every single thing. The following verses teach how to cultivate the
self-awareness in a state of extroversion that develops into and sustains the introverted
contemplation of inner elevation. See Appendix to this chapter concerning the levels of

Sound.

Consciousness is neither being nor nonbeing in the sense of phenomenal
existence, nor is it non-existent. It is in the ‘middle state’ (madhyabhāva) that unfolds in

TANTRÃLOKA

There (in the same Tantra), the Goddess (asks,) alluding (to the

Supreme Self):

‘O God, what is Rāma said to be? Who, O Lord is the one who resides

here? O Great God, tell (me) everything about how that can be practiced.”

Having been asked (this), the Lord (said):


‘O Supreme Goddess, I will explain correctly the Yoga I have called

‘Established in Rāma’ and its practice, as is befitting.’

Thus (having said this), in order to introduce (the subject), the answer is

given in many verses (grantha) (that follow).
Here

(now)

the

author

gquotes

that

(passage

from

the


Triśirobhairavatantra) (not literally) but by way of the meaning of the words:


ḺGĀIERZEEIVGEUUIĒUḤḤI

gatiḥ sthānaṁ ṣvapnajāgradunmeṣaṇanimeṣaṇe |
dhāvanaṁ plavanaṁ caiva āyāsaḥ śaktivedanam || 86 ||
buddhibhedās tathā bhāvāḥ saṁjñāḥ karmāṇyanekaśaḥ |
eṣa rāmo vyāpako ʻtra śivaḥ paramakāraṇam |)| 87 ||
“Ṭhis delight (rāma) is movement, standing (still), dreaming (the
dream of thought constructs) and waking (to the insight of knowledge). (It
is) the opening and closing of the eyes, running, jumping, exerting an effort

(in knowledge and ignorance) (āyāsa), the experience of the energies (of the

senses), the (various) forms of the intellect (buddhi), entities, names and

countless actions. It is Śiva, the supreme (omnipresent) cause, who
pervades (everything) here. (86-87) (87-88)

the subtle metaphysical junction between the polarities of Being and Nonbeing. This
‘expansion in and of the centre (madhyavikāsa) takes place on the fourteen occasions
listed here. All this can also be applied to the practice of maintaining awareness of the
expansion of consciousness that takes place during sexual intercourse. At the moment of
orgasm, discursive thought, which is based on the relativity of opposites, ceases, and the
experiencing subject is in a state of pure wonder (camatkāra) in which the Kuṇḍalinī of

Consciousness rises instantaneously, resplendent with the realization of pure I-ness.

“’’ 86-89 (87-90) is a paraphrase of a passage from the TBh quoted by Jayaratha ad
1/89cd (90cd).
“’ Rāma is the blissful playful Lord who delights in creating the universe. As Jayaratha
explains, Rāma is the name given to ‘the Supreme Lord Who is the Supreme Self, intent

on the play of making the entire universe manifestʼ. AIl these varieties of actions and the


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘Dreamingʼ (means) thought constructs (vikalpa).” ‘Waking’ is

knowledge (born of sensory and mental perception). ‘The opening of the
eyesʼ is the state of Īśvara (in which Śiva consciousness experiences ‘l am all
this (universe)). ‘The closing of the eyesʼ is the state of Sadāśiva (in which

Śiva consciousness experiences that ‘all this (universe) am I’). (The word for

effort) — āyāsa is derived from the root aya in the sense of ‘motion’ (gati). The
meaning of motion (in this case) is in the sense of ‘knowledge’. Thus aya
means ‘going or proceeding’ (ayana), that is, knowledge (by which one comes
to know and proceed). Its āsa means to throw (away) in the sense of its negation

or end (nivrtti), that is, ignorance.' Dharma and the rest are the eight qualities

of the intellect.”" ‘Names’ are (just names that people happen to have) by
chance such as Dittha and the like. ‘Actions’ are (the many kinds of) work
(people are engaged in) (yyāpāra). Thuṣ, the entire universe (of experience) has
been subsumed into these fourteen (activities and states) beginning with
‘movingʼ. (All this) ‘moving’ etc. is Rāma — the Supreme Lord Who is the
Supreme Self, intent on the play of making the entire universe manifest. Thus it
is said that ‘Śiva, the supreme (omnipresent) cause, pervades (all this) here’ʼ.
‘(AII this) hereʼ is the unfolding expansion of Śiva Himself which is this entire
universe within all this which is characterized as ‘moving’ etc. This is the sense.


That is said (in the following verse):


‘Present in all the fields (of consciousness) (viṣaya) and objects of the

senses, wherever one pays attention, there is no place where Śiva is absent.

How can that (perpetually) abiding state (sthiti), which is the attainment

of oneness with that (supreme reality) occur here (in this case)? He says:

rest listed here are collectively, emblematic of all that takes place because Rāma
pervades them all. Thus, Rāma is Śiva, the real cause of the universe.

Cf. ŚSū 1/9 on which Bhāskara comments: ‘The thoughts of the pervasive perceiver

that, constantly renewed, emerge inwardly in the absence of external objects are said (to
constitute) the dream state. The liberated condition (patibhāva) (makes theṣe) thought

constructs firm (and full of divine consciousness), while due to the fettered state, they
are, on the contrary, unstable and said to be the covering (which obscures) the Lord

Who is the power (of consciousness).” See Dyczkowski 1992b: 29 ff.

“ Cf. ŚSū 1/8. Bhāskara explains: ‘Sensory perception is a product of the intellect, eg0,

and mind (coupled with the sensations) of sound, touch, form, taste and smell. The
power of knowledge which belongs to the conscious nature (cidātman) actively flashes

forth (sphurati) in this way in the form of the cognizing subject, means of knowledge

and the object of cognition. Here it is (said to be) the waking state which (marks) the
loss of the fettered soul’s true nature (svarūpahāni).’ Dyczkowski 1992b: 28.

’ The word gati means, most literally. motion. By extension it also means modality or

state of being. In this sense the meaning coincides with that of knowledge, which is also

astate of being, that is, the state of the act of knowing.

”" Thus ‘effort — āyāṣa — means exerting oneself in both states of knowledge of higher

realities and ignorance of them.

”! Concerning the eight qualities of the intellect, see below, 8/265ab-272ab (8/264-271).

SYṬ 4/314.

Read with all the MSs tadaikātmyalakṣaṇā (‘oneness with that (supreme reality)) for

tadaikātmyāpattilakṣaṇā ʻthe attainment of oneness with that (supreme reality)ʼ. The

TANTRĀLOKA

āāTefTTTTT TāJfHTHTTTTTT |
BTRT TH S THTTIJG
fkFIT I|¢¢ 1

kalmaṣakṣīṇamanasā smṛtimātranirodhanāt |
dhyāyate paramaṁ dhyeyaṁ gamāgamapade sthitam || 88 ||
paraṁ Śśivaṁ tu vrajatĩ bhairavãkhyaṁ japãd api |
He who, with a mind free of impurity, meditates on (this) the

supreme object of meditation, located on the plane of ‘going and comingʼ

(gamāgamapada),' by suppressing just (his) memory alone (which is the

source of thought), attains Supreme Śiva, Who is called Bhairava, by the

repeated recitation of Mantra (japa) also.”" (88-89ab) (89-90ab)

word ‘sthiti’ means persistence as well as ‘condition’ or ‘state’ Generally, along with
creation (sṛṣṭi) and withdrawal (saṁhāra), the word denotes one of the phases of the
cycle of creation and destruction. Sometimes, as here, it denotes the state of permanent

persistence of reality. But this is not a static persistence. It is the condition of perpetual
renewal, as it were, of oneness between Śiva and all things, especially the Self of every
living being.
The metre of this quarter is defective. The sixth syllable is guru and the seventh

laghu rather than the other way around. The reading is the same in the text from which it

is drawn that is quoted in the commentary further ahead.

” The expression ‘going and coming’ (gamāgama) commonly denotes the movement

of the breath which ‘goes’ as exhalation (prāṇa) and ‘comes’ as inhalation (apāna) (see
for example KuKh 11/60-61). It may also denote the emergence and withdrawal of the

energies of consciousness. In relation to the repetition of Mantra, which is the context

here, ‘going and coming’ may be applied to the forward and reverse order of reciting a
mantra. If the count of the number of times a mantra is recited is kept with the aid of a

rosary, the ‘going’ is the forward, clockwise direction. This continues up to the main

bead, which is called the Meru. Then starting again from there, the same is repeated in
reverse order. This is the ‘coming’ phase. This pair with respect to the energy that
impels the breathing is the upward and downward motion, respectively (KuKh 40/23cd24), that correspond to the purifying ascent and descent of Kuṇḍalinī through Susumṇā
(ibid. note to 13/140ab, also 18/63cd-65; 30/69cd-72ab). Conversely, the supreme state
of Nirvāṇa is devoid of all ‘going and comingʼ and so is free and tranquil (ibid. 31/51cd54). See Dyczkowski 2009 note vol. 1, p. 162-163 and p. 380-381.
In this case, according to Jayaratha, the expression ‘going and comingʼ is a

metaphorical designation of the fourteen aspects of the ‘nature of the groupʼ

(grāmadharma), as each one involves movement and rest (‘agama’ ‘lack of goingʼ). At
the individual (āṇava) level of duality, the practice involves attending to the movement
of the breath as it comes and goes during these activities. Practicing at the intermediate,

empowered (śākta) level, the polarities to which the yogi attends are the subject and
object. At the supreme (śāmbhava) level, the polarities are the Light of consciousness
(prakāśa) and reflective awareness it has of its own infinite nature. At this level,
realisation is spontaneous and instantaneous, although it may not be permanent.

Swami Lakṣhmanjoo explains: ‘“He contemplates that supreme object which is

established in joy and puts to rest all thought (ṣvaṛti). This must not be done with one's
ordinary mind, but with a mind that is absolutely pure. This [is the] mind in the


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


He whose mind is like that, namely, ‘free of impurity’ — that is, free of
the impurity which is each and every manifestation of duality (bheda). The

mind (manas) thinks (manute), and so is consciousness, which is essentially

reflective awareness. According to the dictum ‘all thought is recollection’, the

‘memory alone’, that is, just memory (in itself, not a particular memory), is the
act of imagining (vikalpana) a body, face, hands etc. ‘Suppressing’, that is,
destroying it by emptying it out of the manifestations of form etc. and taking the
support of that (mind free of duality and the recollection of bodily form), he
‘meditates on the supreme object of meditation’, because it is not contracted

by any fixed form and is Śiva, the supreme cause (of all things), contemplating
(Him) as one with his own Self. As is said (in the Vijñānabhairava):
‘Meditation

(dhyāna) is the immobile,

formless and unsustained

intellect. Meditation does not consist of imagining the face and hands etc. of the

body (of a deity).”

ānākala ([state is at the

highest extreme of Māyā and so] is just at the entry in one’s own plane of being [in the
pure principles beyond Māyā].
It is not only through dhyāna [meditation, which is] full of awareness, that he

enters into that supreme state of Śiva which is Bhairava, but also through [repeated]

recitation [of Mantra] (iapa). The dhyāna [meditation practiced] here is not on a mārti

liconic form]. It is only awareness. Just be attentive, don’t lose your subjective

consciousness. You must observe and hold what you really are — nothing must be
practiced, everything is there. Śaivism does not mean to practice dhyāna [meditation] on
some miūrti [iconic form]. Lower dhyāna [meditation] with a mārti [icon] purifies at

first. You create the image then draw it into yourself.

In Āṇavopāya [the Individual Means] you must be aware [of the centre]
between two breaths. Move in and out with awareness. (True repeated) recitation (of
Mantra) is [the practice of] observing one object then another object [mindfully]. These
are the beads of the rosary of this japa [repeated recitation of Mantra]. Śakti is the sūtra

[thread] that threads through the beads. The thread is the reality of the beads. It is away

from bhāva [Being] and abhāva [Nonbeing] (one bead and another bead). Observe this
universe through every sensation of sound and taste etc. This is Śāktopāya [Empowered
Means]. This is real japa. The (repetition of Mantra) (called) pañcalakṣa [(japa) literally
of 500,000 repetitions] [actually consists of mindfulness of the] five points of awareness
ranging from sṛṣṭi [emanation through to persistence, withdrawal, obscuration up] to
anugraha [grace]. Lakṣa means centre of awareness. It does not mean (the number)

100,000.”

” Alṣo quoted below ad 1/182cd-183ab.

VBh 146 (144). The word ‘dhyāna’ means both meditation in the sense described and

also 'visualization’. The ‘dhyāna’ of a deity is normally understood to be the
visualization of its anthropomorphic form with hands and faces etc. Recollection of
Śiva’s form described in this way the scriptures is a thought construct. Moreover, to
viṣualize Him in this way implies that the mind is engrossed in duality, whereas true

meditation on Śiva is a state of awareness in which He is experienced as one with one’s
own essential nature. True meditation is the reflective awareness aware of the object of

meditation as one’s own Self. Śivopādhyāya:
niścalā

nānolleēkhaśūnyā,

kandahṛd-

TANTRĀLOKA

Of such kind is (this) meditation. ‘Going’ (gama) is in the sense of

‘movement’, that is, the dynamic state (gati), and ‘coming’ (agama) is the

absence of movement, which is being stationary (ṣthāna). (The object of

meditation) is ‘located’ in the aforementioned fourteen-fold support,™ which is

the ‘plane’ secondarily characterized by these two. Thus, it is ‘supreme’, that
is, (completely) full (and unconditioned), and so (the Yogi with a pure mind
who meditates on it) ‘attains Supreme Śiva, Who is called Bhairava’. The
meaning is that he attains (unifying) penetration (samāveśa) into Him.
(Moreover,) he attains Śiva not only by meditation but ‘also by the repeated
recitation of Mantra (japa).

says:

What is this repeated recitation of Mantra? With this doubt in mind, he

tatsvarūpaṁ japaḥ prokto bhāvābhāvapadacyutaḥ || 89 ||
The repeated recitation of Mantra that is free of the polarities of
Being and Nonbeing, is said to be His own nature. (89cd) (90cd)

‘Hisʼ, that is, Śiva’s ‘own nature’ is essentially the supreme form of

Speech (parāvāc) which is the nature of the Self. In other words, contemplated
repeatedly, it is ‘the repeated recitation of Mantra’. Thus it ‘is free of the

polarities of Being and Nonbeing’. In accord with the aforementioned
teaching, it is the essence of the pure reflective awareness of the consciousness
that shines radiantly in the middle (between) them. This is the meaning. That is

said (in the following verse):

‘The contemplation (bhāvanā) that is experienced (and takes place)

repeatedly again and again in the supreme state is here (according to this
scripture) the repeated recitation of Mantra (japa). It is the spontaneous Sound
(of consciousness). Such is the nature of Mantra that should be repeatedly

recited.”'

“‘Immobile’ means fully developed. ‘Formless’ means devoid of many manifestations.
‘Unsustained’ means devoid of supports such as the Root, the Heart, and the End of the

Twelve.”
Emend evaṁvidho dhyātā to evaṁvidhaṁ dhyānaṁ.

Liṣṭed in verses 87-88.
'! VBh 145 (143). This verse is also quoted in SvTu ad 2/137cd-139ab. Śivopadhyāya

explains:
pare bhāve viśvapūraṇe svasvabhāve yā bhāvanā vimarśanā aham eva paro haṁsaḥ

akṛtakāhaṁvimarśātmā japanīyo devaḥ | yā bhāvanā niṣpādyate sa japaḥ iti anvayaḥ |
japyam āha svayaṁ nādo mantrātmā iti pṛthaṅ mantraḥ pṛthaṅ mantrī na siddhyati
kadācana | iti nyāyāt | atra sūkṣmavastūpadeśamaye śāstre ||


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


In this way it is said that the act of abiding in the ‘aṭtribute of the groupʼ
is (the same as) being established in Rāma (rāmastha). The same is stated in the

venerable 7Triśirobhairava (where we read):

‘Moving, standing, dreaming, waking," opening and closing the

eyes, running, jumping, exerting an effort, experiencing the energies (of the
senses), the (various) forms of the intellect (buddhi), entities, names and
countless actions - this is said to be the fourteen-fold delight (rāma).
It is pervaded by Śiva, the God of the gods, Who is the Supreme Self,
present within all existing things, whose auspicious characteristic is (His) many

forms.” He who, with a mind free of impurity, meditates on (this,) the
‘‘Contemplationʼ is the reflecting awareness ‘within the supreme state’, that is,

within one’s own essential nature that fills everything. It is experienced, that is, comes
about in the form of ‘I myself am the supreme Harhsa, Śiva, the supreme causeʼ (SVT
4/399cd). That is ‘(unstruck) Sound’, the deity who should be repeatedly recited, the
nature of which is the reflective awareness of the uncreated ego. The connected sense is
that the contemplation that is generated (thereby) is the repeated recitation of Mantra.
The ‘Mantra that should be recited’ is said to be the spontaneous Sound (of
consciousness), the nature of which is Mantra. This is because the teaching is that
‘separate from the Mantra (he recites), one who recites Mantra is never successfulʼ,

‘hereʼ according to the scripture that consists of the teachings concerning the subtle

reality.”

Abhinava also quotes this verse in ĪPVv 2, p. 262 where he writes: nanu yadi

šabdāvartanaṁ .japas tadavicchinne kālabhedam
aspṛśati paravāgrūpe kathaṁ
japavyavahāraḥ | āvartanasya hi vicchidya vicchidya yad udīraṇaṁ, tad eva rāpam |
parāvasthāyām .iti sakṛdvibhātatvavat sakr̥d āvartanam eva tatra japa iti yāvat,
āvartanavyavahāraśca tatra udayamātre | sakṛcchabdena tu ekavāravācinā

sadārthaparyāyeṇa vā vicchedaśaiṅkā nivāritā,

yathoktaṁ prāk svarasoditā iti | yas tu

bhiūyo bhīyaḥ pare bhāve bhāvanā bhāvyate hi yā |

japaḥ so ʻtra ṣyayaṁ nādo mantrātmā japya īdṛśaḥ || (vi0 bhaió 145)

iti parādaśāyām
api
_āvartanavyavahāraḥ,
paśyantīmadhyamādarśapatitāyāṁ daśāyām |

sa

‘Surely, if the repetition of Mantra is a continuous round of words, how can the
activity of repetition of Mantra take place within the nature of Supreme Speech which,
being undivided, is not affected by temporal division? The utterance of a round (of

sounds) takes place by separating (one sound from another) repeatedly, and that itself is

its nature (rūpa). In the supreme state, the repetition takes place once (atemporally) like
a single flash (sakṛdvibhātatva), and repetition of Mantra is like a continuously repeated
action there when it has just arisen. The word ‘once’, that denotes (something that takes)

place a single time or one that is synonymous with ‘always’, removes the doubt that
there is a break. As was said before, ‘(Speech) arises spontaneously°. (Abhinava then

quotes VBh 145 (143).) Thus (according to this teaching,) continuously repeated action
takes place on the supreme plane also as (takes place) on this plane, that has fallen to the

level of the mirror of the Speech of Vision and the Middle One.”

Read with MSs Ch, N, D: jagrann for jāgrad.
The compound anekākāralakṣmaṇā — whose auspicious characteristic is (His) many

forms’ — is not correct Sanskrit. As an adjective agreeing with ‘śivena’, it should be in
the same instrumental case, i.e. -akṣmaṇena, but this would entail that the seventh
syllable would be guru, whereas it should be laghu. MSs Ch, Ñ, T, and DḌ record a lectio
facilior

TANTRĀḶLOKA

supreme object of meditation located on the plane of ‘going and coming’

(gamāgamapada), by suppressing just (his) memory alone (which is the
source of thought), attains Supreme Śiva, who is called Bhairava, by the
repeated recitation of Mantra (japa) also. The repeated recitation of
Mantra that is free of the polarities of Being and Nonbeing is said to be His

own nature.

fcvgSurely (one may ask,) it is generally said everywhere that the

sphere (viṣaya) of meditation is an object of meditation which has form and is

separate (from the meditator). Moreover, it is said that the repeated recitation

of Mantra is centred on (the Mantra) that is to be recited, which is the object of
denotation of the denotator, the nature of which is thought (vikalpa). Here, on

the contrary, both are (said to be) pure reflective awareness (parāmarśamātra)

which is at one with one’s own nature. How is that? With this doubt in mind,
he says:

Degrees of Freedom and Obscuration

TTTĪRāTĪ īTTYHaTT-TĪIJAĪ |I/oII
tad atrāpi tadīyena svātantryeṇopakalpitaḥ |
dūrāsannādiko bhedaś citsvātantryavyapekṣayā || 90 lI
Here (in this case) also, (it is clear that) the difference (between the

means to realisation) conceived by (the Lord’s) freedom as being, for

example, (more or less) close or distant (from their goal) is with regards
to (the degrees of) freedom of consciousness (citsvātantrya). (90)

Here (according to us), ultimate reality is the Supreme Lord alone, who

is the free Light (of consciousness), because His essence is just the (pure)

reflective awareness of supreme ‘I’-(consciousness) alone. The plurality of the

—lakṣaṇā, which means the same, nor does it solve the problem. We must accept that the
Sanskrit of the text in this place is deviant metri causa.
”! MSs K, Ch, Jh, and D read: tatsvarāpo for tatsvarūpaṁ. In Abhinava’s citation, MSs
Kh, Ch, D and read tatsvarūpo for tatsvarūpaṁ. These variant readings in the MSs

would suggest emending to them. But that is not supported by Jayaratha, who certainly
comments on the reading tatsvarūpam.

! MSs K, Ch, Jh, Ṅ, T, and D read vyatirikākāradhyeyaviṣayatvaṁ for

vyatiriktasākāradhyeya-viṣayatvaṁ — ‘the sphere (viṣaya) of meditation is an object of
meditation which has form separate (from the meditator).”

Note that here Jayaratha is pointing out that it appears that Abhinava’s exegetical

model does not conform to scriptural revelation. Indeed, it cannot, strictly speaking,
simply because the sophisticated Pratyabhijñā notion of ‘reflective awareness’

(parāmarśa, vimarśa eṭc.) īs unknown to it, or as these exegetes would prefer to say —
explicitly known to it. Accordingly, Abhinava now presents (from verse 90 (91) to 93

(94)) a brief exposition of Pratyabhijñā doctrine applicable to this context as a
conclusion to the teachings he has drawn from the Triśirobhairava.

Cf. below, 1/209.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


means to attain it is conceived by Him according to the difference between

those who are to be instructed. Thus, the means that has arisen as predominantly

based on the freedom of consciousness is said to be ‘close’ (to the goal).

Otherwise, (any) other (one) he says is ‘distant’. Similarly also, the means for

any given person (is determined) in relation to the proximity of the goal. Thisṣ

should not be a reason to be confused because, as will be explained (further

ahead), the relationship between the means and the goal is such that they lead to
one another (so those who are at a lower level and need to practice inferior
means pass through them to higher ones).

He concludes this (point by saying):


ā̄T TI ] UU] TTTĪ TTĪA. |I <¢ II
evaṁ svātantryapūrṇatvād atidurghaṭakāry ayam |
kena nāma na rūpeṇa bhāsate parameśvaraḥ || 9 1 ||

In what form does the Supreme Lord not appear by virtue of the
fullness (of His) freedom in this way? (Verily,) He accomplishes miracles!

(91)

The ‘formʼ (in which Śiva appears) is as each one of His (countless)
energies. This is the meaning. Thus, he says:

TRTTITTTI

graīīc’mfiraaṁrṭefi:
rēkcrēkcṉ 1| 33 1
nirāyaraṇam ābhāti bhāty āvṛtanijātmakaḥ |
āvṛtānāvṛto bhāti bahudhā bhedasaṅgamāt | 92 |
iti śaktitrayaṁ nāthe svātantryāparanāmakam |
icchādibhir abhikhyābhir gurubhiḥ prakaṭīkṛtam || 93 |

'Ś This is the means pertaining to Śiva. Abhinava begins his exposition of this means to
realisation, to which Chapter Three is dedicated, by stating that whereas No Means is
the direct experience of the Light of consciousness, this, the highest means, is based on
the disceemment and hence application to the freedom of that Light.
The goal of one means serves as the means to a higher goal. Thus, in one manner of

development, the means lead to one another, to finally reach the ultimate goal. It is also
possible for a means to reach the goal directly. See below, 1/143.

" The text says that Śiva is atidurghaṭakārin, which literally means ‘one who does

what is most difficult to accomplish’. ‘Doing what is most difficult to accomplishī
(durghaṭakaritvā) is commonly said to be a defining characteristic of Śiva’s freedom,
that is, His creative autonomy (svātantrya).

TANTRĀLOKA

(Śiva) manifests free of obscuration. He manifests having obscured

His own nature. He manifests as both (partially) obscured and unobscured.
By

associating

with

duality

(and

diversity

He

manifests)

(bhedasaṁgamāt) īn many ways. Thus, there are three powers within the

Lord (corresponding to these three conditions). (My venerable) teacher
has clearly elucidated (their nature) as being those named will, (knowledge
and action), otherwise (collectively) called (His) (creative) freedom

(svātantrya). (92-93) (93-94)

He is ‘free of obscuration’ because He is the pure light (of

consciousness), and ‘covered’ because of the emergence of the impurity of
duality (bheda). (He is) ‘both (partially) obscured and unobscured’ because

of the subtle indication (āsūtraṇa) of the impurity of duality (that takes place)

even though He is pure noetic consciousness (jñāna). Thus, (He possesses) a
supreme, inferior and middling state and (shines) ‘in many ways’, that is,

because of the multiplicity of the objects of desire etc., (He is) of many kinds.
This is the meaning.

Even though (Śiva) is free of obscuration, duality is present (there, but)

just as a latent tendency (vāsanāmātra), because it is (constantly) in the process

of being denied (niṣedhyamāna). The word ‘thus’ refers to (Śiva’s) own

”" No obscuring covering veils consciousness in the highest level of practice of the

Divine Means (śāmbhavopāya). Veils separate Śiva from the individual soul at the other

two lower levels of practice. They are fully in place at the lowest, individual level of
practice (āṉavopāya) in which duality prevails, but only partially so at the intermediate
level of the Empowered Means, which is that of unity-in-diversity.
Abhinava explains in his Tantroccaya: ‘The manifestation of (Śiva’s) own

nature is His freedom. And that (can) take place instantaneously when he whose body is

destroyed (at death), there at that very moment (possesses) Śiva's nature (śivatā) (see
below, 13/130cd and TSā p. 120). Or else (this may be brought about) gradually and in
three ways, that is by the empowered and other (means). This is what we are (about to
explain). And it is said:

‘This Self, who is free and whose form is Light, obscures its own nature. Then

again it reveals this, Siva’s aesthetic delight (rasa), either all of a sudden or gradually

(part by part — kramaśaḥ). (TSā p. 7)

Jayaratha takes gurubhiḥ to mean ‘teachers’. 1 take this be an honorific plural

referring to Śambhunātha, who taught Abhinava Trika. It not at all likely that there were

many Trika teachers of this novel teaching concerning the three categories of means to
realization to which Abhinava is alluding. If this is correct, here we have evidence that
Abhinava learnt the basis, at least, of the categorization of practice (upāyabheda), which

is not found in the scriptures in the form he presents it, from his Trika teacher.

See above, 1/2-4; cf. ŚDr̥1/3-4. The three powers of will, knowledge and action
operate predominantly in the practice of the Divine, Empowered and Individual Means,

respectively. They are embodied in the Trika Goddesses Parā, Parāparā and Aparā.

Together, they are Śiva’s freedom (svātantrya).

The trace of duality present in Śiva is only as that which is denied by the oneness of
His infinite, unlimited Being.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


(unobscured) nature. Thus, the teachers who have brought these scriptures

down (to earth) have revealed that (Śiva nature) is the three manifest powers,
Parā (Parāparā and Aparā,) (who correspond to Śiva’s) unobscured (veiled and
unveiled, and obscured form, respectively,) that are called (individually) will,
(knowledge and action) as the field of operation (viṣaya) of the Supreme Lord,

and are (collectively) called the power of (His creative) freedom. Thus,

(the

view that) ‘He possesses many powers amounts to (His) inseparable union with

that one powerʼ has been established.

(Śiva's) possessing many powers is the reason that impels those who
name (Him as they do). Thus, he says:
The Etymology of the Names of Bhairava, Deva and Pati

mēītazaīsā r: ra-. fīā. || <1
devo hy anvarthaśāstroktaiḥ śabdaiḥ samupadiśyate |

mahābhairavadevo ‘yaṁ patir yaḥ paramaḥ śivaḥ || 94 |

(The nature of) God (deva) is taught by means of words stated in
the scriptures (that serve as etymologies), the meanings of which are in
accord with His nature. He is this great Bhairava, the Lord (Pati) and

Supreme Śiva. (94)

Jayaratha is saying that the word ‘thus’ (iti) is with reference to Śiva’s essential,

unobscured nature and its power. This is described in the remaining part which is

introduced by the word ‘thus’.
Above, 1/66ab (1/66cd).

” Justified by the common belief that the name given to a deity or supernatural being

reflects its nature, its etymology, even if not philologically fully correct, is a standard
didactic device. Moreover, it may serve as a means to upgrade the being named, and so

too integrate him or her into diverse traditions and their teaching. Thus Sanderson

(2006: 62) observes: ‘For the unlearned, we may suppose, the name was adequately
explained by its literal meaning (‘The Terrible’), since its bearer is associated with the

cremation grounds and requires alcoholic and non-vegetarian offerings, even human

sacrifices. These associations, however, make him an unlikely candidate for the role of
the Absolute. The nondualist tradition therefore overlaid the basic meaning of the name
with more appropriate interpretations.’ Several didactic etymologies are presented
in the
TĀ and the commentary, beginning with that of Gaṇapati above (1/22), and below
Deva

(1/103ab-106ab (1/103-106)), Pati (i.. Śiva) 1/104ab (1/104), Parā (TĀv ad 3/236), the
twelve Kālīs 4/148-172 and commentary, Kālī (4/173cd-176), Malinī (5/132d-133cd
(5/131d-133ab)), Kālasaṁṅkarṣiṇī (15/346-347cd), Maātṛsadbhāva (15/347cd-349ab
(15/347cd-348)), Mahāpreta (15/310) and also Triśirobhairava (MVV 1/395-397).

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The etymologies in the scriptures’ are those arrived at through

grammatical analysis (vyutpatti), semantic etymologies (nirukta), and those

coherent with the statements in the scriptures (sāmavāyika).

He (now) states (what they are):


faã frafā dīmŪoṛTTJTĪR
ṜTT fJād 1

za-

#ṇar--+sftṝsīraī-

#ī: sīã: 1

fīrd'ṁ atTkīaaā -7 1| Q

Tj T T2: 1| QuI

hEILEṭIEEI

ī-dātzzgfāīeeEitteautzi ḷḤḷIAĀT
" Read vyutpattaiḥ for vyutpannaiḥ.

Read with J and N, sāmavāyikaiḥ for sāmayikaiḥ. Cf. Sanderson in Sāmarasya note
123, quoted by Báumer (2011) p. 67 note 1: ‘By the disciplines of text-analysis Ī mean

grammatical analysis (vyutpatti) and semantic analysis (nirvacanam). Both provide the

exegete with considerable room for manoeuvre. He needs to show only that the meaning

he attributes to a sentence does not infringe the rules of grammar. It is not necessary to
consider how far the expression of that meaning through the words conforms to normal
usage, word-order or the like. It is enough that the meaning is not grammatically
impossible. Semantic analysis is even more flexible. It enables an exegete to insert the
meaning he seeks by deriving a word artificially from the meaning of verbal roots that
resemble the sounds or syllables that compose it (akṣaravarṇasāmānyāt); see Kahrs
1998, p. 37 quoting Yāska: akṣaravarṇasāmānyān nibrūyāt ‘one may analyse on the
basis of similarities of syllables or sounds.’ Abhinavagupta echoes these words in PTv
p. 268, 11 23-24 (KED p. 241): tathā ca vedavyākaraṇe parameśvareṣu ca śāstreṣu
(conj. śāstreṣu Gnoli, KED) mantradīkṣādiśabdeṣv akṣaravarṇasāmānyān nirvacanam
upapannam ʻIn the explanation of the Veda and in [explaining] such words as mantraḥ
and dīkṣā in the Śaiva scriptures it is proper to analyse meaning on the basis of

similarity of sounds or syllables.”


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


viśvaṁ bibharti poṣaṇadhāraṇayogena tena ca bhriyate |
svavimarśatayā ravarūpataś ca saṁsārabhīruhitakṛc ca || 95 ||
saṁsārabhītijanitād

ravāt parāmarśato 'pi hṛdi jātaḥ |

prakaṭībhūtaṁ bhavabhaya-

vimarśanaṁ śaktipātato yena || 96 ||

nakṣatraprerakakālatattvasaṁśoṣakāriṇo ye ca |
kālagrāsasamādhānarasikamanahsu teṣu ca prakaṭaḥ || 97 ||
saṅkocipaśujanabhiye
yāsāṁ ravaṇaṁ svakaraṇadevīnām |
antarbahiścaturvidha-

khecaryādīkagaṇasyāpi || 98 II

tasya syāmī ṣaṁsāra-

vṛttivighatanamahābhīmaḥ |

(God is called Bhairava for the following reasons). A) He sustains
(bibharti) the universe by nourishing™ and supporting it and is sustained
by that. Again (He is called Bhairava) by virtue of His nature as the

(cosmogonic) resonance (rava)™ (of consciousness) as His own reflective

awareness. B) He helps those who are frightened of transmigratory
existence (sarīsārabhīru). C) He is born within the Heart (of one’s own
consciousness) by the cry (rava) born of the fear (bhiīti) of transmigratory

existence or by the contemplation (of Deity stimulated by that fear). D)

Read poṣaṇa- for pūraṇa-, as Jayaratha apparently does and Sanderṣon (1990: 75)
suggests.
”" Read ravarūpataś for rava rūpataś.
” According to the first etymology, Bhairava’s name is derived from the roots ‘bhrṛ,
meaning to sustain and nourish, and ‘ru’, to shout. These two roots, along with ‘vamm’,
which literally means to vomit, understood metaphorically as ‘to emit’, are the ones that

most commonly appear in the less elaborate etymologies we find in the Tantras and

commentaries. Examples are those in the Vijñānabhairavatantra (130) and in the

Kubjikā Tantras (see below, note 1,749). The series of etymologies Abhinava presents

here are largely taken over by later teachers, including Kṣemarāja in his commentary on
Svacchandatantra SVT 1/1-4ab and Śivopādhyāya on VBh 130 (128). See Sanderson
2006: 62-63.

” Read with MSs K, Ch, Jh, N, T and Ḍ: svavimarśatayā for savimarśatayā.
” From the roots, ‘bhī’, ‘fear’ and ‘av’, protectʼ.

” From ‘bhīrava’ ‘a cry (for help bor) of the fear of transmigration in the hearts of

those who invoke Him’. The form ‘bhairava’ thus means ‘He who is born from this
cryʼ.

TANTRĀLOKA

(He is called Bhairava because the liberating) reflection on the fear (due to
this) fettered existence (bhavabhaya) is rendered lucid by the descent of His
power (of grace) (śaktipāta). E) He is clearly manifest in the minds of those

who delight in the contemplation that devours time that (thus) completely

exhausts the principle of time that impels the constellations.” F) He is the
master of the goddesses of the senses whose cry (ravaṇa) frightens

contracted souls”” and (also) of the internal and external hoard of the four

kinds (of Yoginīs,) starting with those who wander in the Sky (of
Consciousness) (khecarī). G) He annihilates the ongoing course of

The word ‘bhairava’ is here derived from ‘bhā’ meaning ‘star’ and the root ‘ī’’, to
push, impel or move. Together they form the word ‘hhera’ which is understood to mean
time. The last syllable — ‘va — is interpreted as a derivative of the root ‘vai’, to exhaust.

Thus the ‘bheravas’ are those who exhaust (vayanti) time, while Bhairava (derived from
‘bherava’) is their inner nature.

Although such etymologies are common to many schools, they often add
features that adapt them to their perspectives. Here it is clear that this and the following
one are adapted to the Krama system’s perspective. Moreover, whilst the other

etymologies listed here are commonly found in some form in the textual sources, these
two are unusual. One wonders whether Abhinava formulated them himself. The lack of
reference to a textual or traditional authority here may be a sign that he did indeed do so.
Either way, it is clear that he means to integrate into his exposition, as he does in many

other cases throughout his Tantrāloka, a Krama view which centres on the relationship
between time and non-temporal consciousness.

” According to this didactic etymology, the word ‘bhairava’ is a compound referring to

those powers ‘whose shouting instils fear’, of which Bhairava is the Lord.

Abhinava describes these groups of Yoginīs in the PTv (p. 41), where he identifies
their source as the Skyfarer (Khecarī), the Goddess of Consciousness, who figures in the
Krama teachings as the fundamental nature of four spheres of these Yoginīs, identified
as energies of perception operating within the four domains of progressively unfolding
cognitive consciousness. He writes:

‘(The energy of consciousness is called the ‘skyfarer’) because, abiding in the
‘skyʼ, that is, (the Absolute) Brahman which is undivided (oneness) (abhedarūpa),
‘fares’ (through it in the sense that) she brings about the knowledge of the object of the
senses (viṣaya). In this way, She is responsible for the behaviour (of the perceiver, who)
avoids (what is undesirable) and takes up (what is) and the like, (even as She) abides in
(the perceiver's) own nature. Thus, the Skyfarer is both the inner and outer senses and

their respective objects, such as (the inner sensation of) pleasure and the (outer
perception of the colour) blue and the like. The powers that move in the Sky (of
consciousness), namely, 1) Vyomacarī (Skyfaring, i.e. Khecarī), 2) Gocarī (Faring in the
Field of the Senses), 3) Dikcarī (Faring in the Directions), and 4) Bhūcarī (Faring on the

Earth) are, in due order progressively, 1) the plane of the Void, in which the relationship

between subject and object has not (yet) arisen; 2) the outpouring of perception, which
is pure consciousness alone; 3) the outpouring of the (initial) indication (diśyamāna) of
duality, consisting of the inner oneness associated with the aspect which is objectivity;
and 4) the clearly evident prominence of duality. (Thus,) these powers, on the basis of
the (holistic) principle expounded previously, are in reality not separate from the

Skyfaring power, who by her very nature wanders freely (in the unlimited expanse of)
her own (conscious) nature. Thus, the power of the Supreme Lord is just one. As is said:
‘His powers are the entire universe, while the Great Lord is the possessor of power.”


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


transmigration and so is the Great Terrible One. (95-99ab) (96-100ab)

A) ‘He sustains (bibharti)’, supports and nourishes (the universe),
because it pours out (into manifestation) as adhering (saṁlagna) to the screen of

His own nature. And He is sustained and nourished ‘by that’ universe, because
(in His immanent aspect) He shines radiantly everywhere as the universe. He is

‘the (cosmogonic) resonance (rava) (of consciousness)ʼ, because it is (his)
very nature to resound (śabdana), and so according to this etymology, (He is)
Bhairava because (He) ‘sustainsʼ (bharaṇa) and ‘resounds’ (ravaṇa).

Note that Kṣemarāja’s conception of these energies is not quite the same. He

sees them as derivations of a fifth higher sphere populated by the energies of

Vāmeśvarṁī. Kṣemarāja explains that they are the ‘Vāmā energies (so called because

they) run counter (vāmācāra) to saṅṣāra (for the awakened yogi) and (because) they

emit (vāmanti) the universe of unity and diversity along with the essence of duality
(bheda). They loudly proclaim and emit the essence of diversity (for the ignorant) and

bestow the essence of oneness (abheda) which is unity and multiplicity (bhedābheda)

(to the awakened). As their foundation (and source), their mistress is (this) one goddess
alone.’ (SpSaṁ p. 20) Kṣemarāja goes on to present the four spheres of energies as
operating within 1) the plane of the subject — Khecarī, 2) the plane of the inner mental
organ (antaḥkaraṇa) — Gocarī, 3) the ten external senses, five of sense perception
(buddhīndriya) and five of action (karmendriya) — Dīkcarī, 4) the five sensations which
are the objects of the senses. Projections of Vāmeśvarī, the one fundamental energy of
consciousness, they operate the same way, binding the unenlightened, whereas, on the
contrary, they sustain the insight of the liberated by manifesting nonduality in all these

spheres, For details, see Dyczkowski 1992a: 69-70 (= SpSam p. 20-21 cf. SpNir p. 37-

38), Dyczkowski 1987: 129ff., and Sanderson 2006: 69-70.

” Evidently basing himself on these verses, Kṣemarāja says in SvTu ad 1/1 4ab:

‘Bhairava’s nature is to fill (bharaṇa), cause to resound (ravaṇa) and emit
(vamana) the universe. According to the etymology (of his name), he is the freedom
from fear of those who are timorous, that is to say, he bestows freedom from fear to
those who are in the world of transmigration. Fear is the fear (bhī) which is the fright of

transmigratory existence. ‘Sound’ (rava), is the cry created by that (fear). The ‘sound of

fear” (bhīrava) that arises from that is the unconscious response (sphurita) of those who
cry out. (Bhairava) is he who by means of the descent of the power (of His grace)

elevates the one who, engaged in reflecting on the fear of transmigratory existence, cries

out in fear. Time that impels (irayati) the stars (bha), that is, the constellations, is

‘bhera’. Those who make it pass (vāyanti) are ‘bheravas'. They are the yogins who are

the gourmets (that enjoy the aesthetic delight of) the contemplative absorption that
devours time. This (Bhairava) is their inner nature. The sound (rava) that frightens
fettered beings is the reflective awareness of the differentiated energies (kalā) that arise
etc. from the Aggregate of Sounds (of the phonemes). The sounds of fear are the

goddesses of consciousness, that is, the wheels of Khecarīs, Gocarīs, Dikcarīs and
Bhūcarīs. Their lord is this Bhairava. ‘In this way Bhairava is frightening and intent on

destroying transmigratory existence, because the etymology (of his name) has been
given in this way in the Āgamas and because his nature has been explained in accord
with the meaning (of his name) by the venerable Bṛhaspati in the Śivatanu.’

Drawing no doubt from Kṣemarāja and Abhinava, Maheśvarānanda presents
the same etymologies of the names Bhairava and Deva in his Mahārthamañjarī (p. 172-

173).

TANTRĀLOKA

B) Bhairava is He who ‘helps those who are frightened’. Fear is the
instrumental cause of transmigratory existence; thus, He bestows freedom from

fear to those who are subject to transmigration. This is the meaning.

C) Fear (in this context) is the fright of transmigratory existence. The
‘cry’ born of that is the cry (for help) which has as its object the Lord, or else it

is the reflection (on the Deity) that is born from that. Thus (He is called)

Bhairava who shines in the Heart, which is the plane of ultimate reality, of those

who cry out (to Him) and reflect (on Him).

D) (He is called) Bhairava because the cry (rava) of fear (bhī) (one
experiences due to this) fettered existence (bhava) is the ‘reflection’, that is,
discernment, of which this (cry) is the cause, by means of the descent of (His)

power (of grace) (śaktipāta) (it invokes). The point is that this (cry) itself is the
instrumental cause also of dispassion from transmigratory existence.
E) ʻThe principle of tīme’ consisting of moments etc. is (called)
‘bhera’ because it impels (īrayati) the constellations, that is, the shining stars
(bhāni). The ‘bheravas’ are yogis who ‘completely exhaust’ without residue,
time, that is, they overcome it and (so) make it to pass (vāyanti), (their) attention

well fixed on the contemplative absorption (samādhi) that devours time. He

who is (their) Lord (swamin) ‘is clearly manifest’ and shines radiantly within
them as (ultimate) reality, (and so is accordingly called) Bhairava.

We could also understand Abhinava here to mean that one who is afraid of
transmigratory existence and desires liberation from it is protected by Bhairava.

Bhairava’s expanded state of consciousness can be experienced in moments of
powerful psychic intensity, as when one is very frightened. By attending closely to the

consciousness which is the source of these intense emotions, Bhairava manifests to His
devotees. As the VBh (verse 118) teaches: ‘At the beginning and end of sneezing, in a
state of fear or sorrow, (standing) on top of an abyss or while fleeing from a battlefield,
at the moment of intense curiosity, at the beginning and end of hunger; such a state
comes close to the experience of Bhairava. (translation by Báumer). Cf. verse 22 of the

Spandakārika: ʻSpanda is stable in the state one enters when extremely angry, intensely
excited, running or wondering what to do.” Śee Dyczkowski, 1992, p. 100-102, 158-

159, 223-224 and corresponding notes.
Notice, by the way, that the Spandakārikā is most probably following the

Vijñānabhairava, which in all probability preceded it. What has happened is that the

experience of the dynamism of consciousness — spanda — has replaced the experience of

Bhairava as the ultimate experience.

In the scriptural

sources, notably the

Jayadrathayāmala, the term ‘spanda’ frequently occurs as the dynamism of the Kālī
Krama. Kṣemarāja was quite right in identifying the Spanda teachings as those of ‘secret

tradition’, that is, Krama. His frequent citations from the VBh in the course of his

commentary on the Śivasūtra similarly imply that he understood them to be closely

related.

” The well-known word samādhi literally means ‘gathering well together’. It thus

appropriately denotes the highest levels of concentration, for example, in Buddhist
sources (as the last and highest stage of the Noble Eight-fold Path), and in the Yogasūtra

and related sources. Some have suggested the translation ‘trance’, because this state of
intense concentration is so completely absorbing that it may be accompanied by loss of
consciousness of the outer world. In this case, one could argue that it is a ‘trance’ that

consumes time. But as the word ‘trance’ has a series of other connotations (such as
possession), I prefer the more usual translation, even though forms of samādhi taught in
certain Tantras are indeed much like ‘trance’.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


F) The powers of the senses are the goddesses of the senses ‘of the
fettered souls (whose consciousness is) contracted’, and consist of the
perception of duality. Their ‘roar’ is the reflective awareness of the (obscuring)
energies of the letters ‘K’ etc. that arise out of (Bhairava in His aspect as) the

Assembly of Sounds (of the phonemes) that ‘serves to frighten’ (the fettered
soul) by generating each (experience of) pleasure and pain. In the same way,
‘the internal and external group of four kinds (of Yoginīs,) starting with
those who wander in the Sky (of Consciousness) (khecarī) that are the
subject, object (means of knowledge and the noetic consciousness that

encompasses them called) Khecarī, Gocarī, Dikcarī and Bhūcarī, are the ‘sounds
of fear (bhīrava)’. This Bhairava is master of them (all).

G) He is ‘the Great Terrible One’, that is, the fierce one (who
annihilates the ongoing course of transmigration). Thus, he has been denoted by
convention here (in our scriptures) by the word Bhairava. This is the overall

sense.


He concludes this (saying):


iīa zf r̥efftṁra; #aga: ũa 1| R<II
bhairava iti gurubhir imair

anvarthaiḥ saṁstutaḥ śāstre || 99 |I

The teachers praise Bhairava with these etymologies in the

scriptures. (99cd) (100cd)

Juṣṭ as Maātṛkā is the aspect of the Goddess when Her body is contemplated as

consisting of the fifty letters of the alphabet, similarly Bhairava is Śabdarāśi — the
Assembly of Sounds when His body is contemplated in the same way. The deities who
govern the letters, which are their embodiments, are female Mātṛkās in the first case and

male Bhairavas in the second (for the Trika explanation of the relationship between
them, see below 3/198). When their true divine nature is recognized, the energies and
powerholders of the letters are liberating; otherwise, they generate the thought
constructs that bind the fettered soul. Cf. SpKā 45: “He who is deprived of his power by

the forces of obscuration (kalā), and a victim of the powers arising from the Assembly
of Sounds, is called the fettered soul.”

Whereas Abhinava draws from a text — the Śivatanuśāstra by Bṛhaspati — for the
etymology

of

the

word

— god- in the following passage, he attributes the didactic etymology of the name

Bhairava to ‘teachers in the scriptures’. As Bṛhaspati was a Siddhāntin, it is hardly
likely that he was the source of that etymology also. According to Jayaratha, ‘the
teachersʼ are those who have brought down this or that scripture (to earth). Concluding
his didactic etymology of the words Bhairava and Deva in his commentary on the
Svacchandatantra (SyTu 1/1-4ab), Kṣemarāja states that: tathā bhairavo bhīṣaṇaḥ
saṁsāravighaṭanaparaḥ, evam āgameṣu nūruktatvāt, śrībrṛhaspatipādaiḥ śivatanāv
anvarthavyākhyāta-svarūpatvāc ca | ‘In this way Bhairava is frightening and intent on

destroying transmigratory existence because the etymology (of his name) has been

given in this way in the Āgamas and because his nature has been explained in accord
with the meaning (of his name) by the venerable Bṛhaspati in the Śivatanu. Kṣemarāja

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The teachers’ are those who have brought down this or that scripture
(to earth). They ‘praise’ (Bhairava) with these aforementioned ‘etymologiesʼ,

that is, with appellations that accord with (His) nature (artha). He is well known

in ‘the scriptures (in general), as they do not assume (any) particular
(difference with respect to one another in this regard), that is to say, He is
mentioned everywhere (in them). Again, He is (also) properly ‘praised’ with
‘etymologies that accord with His nature by presenting (His) capacity

(sāmarthya) to fill (bharaṇa) etc. all the universe.™ This is the meaning. As is
said (in the Vijūānabhairava):

would thus understand the plural ‘teachers' to be an honorific plural referring to
Śiva/Bhairava, the teacher of the scriptures. Even s0, one wonders whether Abhinava is
also referring here to his teachers or just the one Śambhunātha reverentially in the
plural, as we find just a little further ahead (1/(103ab) (103ef)) with reference to
Bṛhaspati. Jayaratha notes that, according to him, ‘the reading ‘gurugaditair’ is the best

reading.’ This can mean both ‘spoken by the teacher’ or ‘by the teachers’. In that case
one could also translate this line as ‘Bhairava is praised by these teachers (or this

teacher) of the scriptures with these etymologies.”
Certainly, some of these derivations are generally recognisable amongst the
many we find in the scriptural sources, but even so there are some that are quite unusual,
perhaps even unique. One is especially so, namely, the one that teaches that Bhairava

impels the stars. His association in this way with the passage of time suggests a Krama

influence, which is made clearly evident by the associated reference to Khecarīs and
other yoginīs commonly found in Krama sources. We know that Śambhunātha
sponsored a form of Trika that culminates at its highest level with the Krama Goddess.
It makes sense that he should teach a corresponding form of Bhairava.
Evidently basing himself on these verses, Kṣemarāja presents etymologies of
the words ‘Bhairava’ and ‘deva’ in his commentary on the Svacchanda (SvTu ad 1/1-

4ab). Reversing the order of Abhinava’s presentation, he begins with the etymology of
the word ‘deva’, and then goes on to this one of ‘Bhairava’. Here Kṣemarāja concludes
this passage by attributing the etymologies to Bṛhaspati. However, in the TĀ, only that

of the word ‘deva’ is clearly attributed to him. It is unlikely that the other one is also his.
It is clear from the numerous references drawn from his Śivatanu and other references
that Bṛhaspati was a Siddhāntin. It is very unlikely that he would focus on Bhairava
specifically as ‘deva’ in this special way. Moreover, portrayed here with Yoginīs well

known in the Krama tradition, it is clear that he is the Bhairava of that tradition. We
know of no such connection with the Krama in the surviving fragments of Bṛhaspati’s

work, nor would we expect there to be. Thus, it appears that Kṣemarāja understood

Abhinava’s attribution of the etymology of the word ‘deva’ to Bṛhaspati to apply to that

of Bhairava also. Indeed, this seeming attribution has been cause to pause for me to
reflect also, but for the reasons given, this appears to be very unlikely. It is more likely
that Abhinava compiled it himself from a number of traditional etymologies, and took
the opportunity to present a Bhairava who is consonant with the form of Trika he

champions, that is linked to Krama.

Bhairava is the common form of Śiva in all the Bhairava Tantras, regardless of the
particular school to which they may belong. In other words, Bhairava, in one form or
other, is the consort of all the goddesses, great and small, of the dominantly Śākta
schools of the Bhairava Tantras.
Cf. for example NT 21/74ab: bharaṇāt prakriyāṇḍānāṁ sa bhairava iti smrtaḥ | He

is called Bhairava because he fills the (cosmic) eggs (visualized in their corresponding)

manner (of worship).” Kṣemarāja takes this to be the standard etymology, evidently


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

‘(Bhairava is so called) because (He) fills (bhriyāt) everything and

causes it to resound (ravayati).'' He gives all things” and He pervades within

everything. Thus, by uttering the word ‘Bhairava’ at length, (one becomes)

drawing from one in SvTu 1/1-4ab here. However, the etymology he presents at the
beginning of his commentary on the VBh is not the same:
bhīrāṇām abhayaprado bhavabhayākrandasya hetus tato

hr̥ddhāmni prathitaś ca bhīravarucām īśo 'ntakasyāntakaḥ |
bhīraṁ vāyati yaḥ svayoginivahas

viśvasmin bharaṇādikrd vijayate

tasy prabhur bhairavo

vijṅānarāpaḥ paraḥ l 1 |I

‘He bestows freedom from fear to those who are fearful. He is the cause of the
cry of the fear of transmigratory existence. Experienced in the abode of the heart, He is
the Lord, the destroyer of death, of those who are in agony with the cry of fear. The
Lord of He who transports time (causing it to pass) and is transported by his own
Yoginīs is Bhairava. He who, supreme, in all this (universe) fills etc. (all things) and
whose nature is consciousness (vijñāna), is victorious.”

The point Jayaratha is making is that Bhairava is praised everywhere in His
scriptures in a general way, His nature being such as the meanings of His name suggest.

He may be praised without necessarily referring to any of His specific attributes to

which these etymologies refer. Their purpose is not so much to supply etymologies of

the names of a deity (however accurate or fanciful), but to serve as a means of praising

it. Moreover, Jayaratha says that didactic etymologies (nirvacana) of Bhairava’s name
such as those Abhinava presents are common in the scriptures, which is true. To

illuṣṭrate his point, he quotes from the VBh as an example.
This verse is quoted in TĀv ad 5/136cd-137ab (135cd-136ab). It reads racayati —
‘deploys’ for ravayati — ‘causes to resound’. The reading here is as we find it in TĀv ad

1/99cd (100cd). It is the most generally accepted and so has been retained. However,
when Jayaratha quotes this verse a second time, it appears that he accepts the former
reading (i.e. ‘deploys’). Given the large variety of meaningful variant readings of the

VBh in the MSs that may already have existed in Jayaratha’s time, it is not impossible
that he accepted both readings.

The printed edition of the version of this verse commented by Śivopādhyāya reads

sarvago — ʻpresent everywhere’ for sarvado — ‘gives all things’. Clearly the former

reading is redundant and is supported only by MS N, whereas the latter reading is found
both here and the second time Jayaratha quotes this verse.

7 VBh 130 (128). Instead of bhriyāt — ‘because (He) fills’, the printed text of the VBh

reads bhayā (Śivopādhyāya’s reading) and bhiyā (Ānandabhaṭṭa’s reading, in which
case the text says that ‘(Bhairava is so called because) He makes all cry out (ravayati)
with fear (bhī).’” Swami Lakshmanjoo explains that variant: “When you scream in fear,

God is there. It is with the intensity of fear that you cry out to the Lord to protect you.
You want His support. If God is there you are protected. You have to focus your mind
on the meaning of Bhairava. You have to scream before the Lord, not before anybody
else. The fear has to be extreme, the torture has to be intense. . . . ‘“Bhairava’ means

when you are afraid and scream, He is there. [He pervades] means He is all-pervading.

He is there. When you want to explain [i.e. experience] this state of Bhairava, recite this
word Bhairava in continuity and you will become Bhairava. When you yourself become
Bhairava, what fear is there? (2002: 154-155)
This is clearly a popular reading and appears to yield the most sense, so much
so that one is tempted simply to emend the text here. But there can be no doubt that the

TANTRĀLOKA

one Jayaratha quotes is also an early one. Indeed, even though it is not strictly
etymologically correct, the perception of Bhairava as the sustainer of everything is
widely prevalent. Thus, Abhinava begins his series of etymologies with that one and
refers to it in the PTv (p. 63) where he writes: “Bhairava’s nature is to fill (and nourish)
and He is the sound (rava) of the great Mantra’. In his Prabodhapañcadaśikā (verse 4)
he says that
‘he is the god Bhairava whose characteristic is to fill (and nourish) (bharaṇa)
the universe and by whose power the totality (of all things) is reflected in the mirror of

his own nature.

Accordingly, Abhinava accepts the reading ‘bhriyāt’ (‘may he fill’) in his
quotation of this verse in the ĪPVV (vol. 2 p. 214). Moreover, when Jayaratha quotes this
same verse again below in TĀv ad 5/136cd-137ab (135cd-136ab) we find the same

reading. Jayaratha’s introduction to this verse here removes any doubt that this is the

reading Jayaratha had before him. The unanimity of the manuscripts of his commentary

further confirms it. Again, it is a notable feature of the transmission of the text of the
VBh that it is has preserved a surprisingly large number of viable variants. They are so
many that both the 16" century commentator Ānandabhatṭa and Śivopādhyaya a century

1ater feel compelled to note several of them in their commentaries. Clearly, a complete
study of the VBh requires an edition of the text on the basis of the largest number of
MSs possible, whilst taking note of the major significant variants.
Śivopādhyāya prefers the reading bhayā (‘by means of the light’). According to
him, the diphthong AI of the name ‘Bhairava’ denotes ‘the clearly evident (i.e. active)

power of action’ of which Bhairava is the possessor and by virtue of which He is Śiva.

‘Thus’, he writes ‘the meaning of the word Bhairava is this: Maheśvara (represented by)
the letter AI, the possessor of the power of action, causes everything to resound, that is,
reflects on it by means of the light which is the light of consciousness.” Ānandabhaṭṭa

who reads bhiyā (‘due to fear’) explains that Bhairava ‘causes all this universe to
resound, that is, ponder, due to fear. Or else he protects it (avati = rakṣati) by the
reflective awareness that “I am all (this) mass of perceivables, that is, blue and (all else

that is) not blue, pleasure and (all else that is experienced mentally that is) not pleasure.”
Thuṣ, one attains Śiva by attaining stability of the experience that “I am everywhere
internally and externally”.

Even so, Śivopādhyāya writes: ‘there are some who read ‘(Bhairava is socalled) because He fills (bhriyāt) everything and causes (it) to resound (ravayati).’ That
is not a sound (sādhu) (view). It would make sense if one were to establish (the
etymology) of the word ‘bhṛrava’ or the like. Although this is the reading in the
majority of the manuscripts, even so, (pray tell me) in relation to which of the letters (of
the word Bhairava) would (the word) ‘bharati’, the meaning of which is ‘sustaining and

nourishingʼ, be applicable? Amongst the (phonemes) of the word ‘Bhairava’, (the word)
‘bharati’ is not related thus to the phoneme BHAI nor to the phoneme RA or VA.

(Even) assuming the view that (the phonemes are read) together, it is not sound (to
derive the sense of) ‘filling etc. (bharaṇa) from the pair of phonemes ‘BHARA’ and
the meaning ‘resound’ (ravaṇa) from just the letter VA. It is not reasonable to apply the
maxim of the ‘eye of a crow’ (i.e. that one thing can be applied to perform two
functions, see above, note 1,88) by first linking the first two phonemes together and then
by again conjoining the phoneme RA, which was applied before, to the phoneme VA,

because then much thought would have to applied (to this question) as it is hard to

conceive (how that could be). (Again, it is said that the word) Bhairava means ‘filling’
(bharaṇa), ʻresounding’ (ravaṇa) and ‘emitting’ (vamana). (But) although this is an old
(traditional) meaning, it is does not bear logical scrutiny, because (the etymology of) the


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------



Again:

‘(The exhaled breath (prāṇā) above and the inhaled (jīva) below, (the

goddess) Parā who is emission (visarga), is uttering forth (and manifesting in

this way) within the two places where they originate.) By filling (them thus, the

yogi attains) the state of plenitude (bharitasthiti).”™

word ‘Bhairava’ is not (thereby) successfully established (read bhairavapadasyaivam
asiddhatvāt for bhairavapadasyaiva siddhatvāt). The phoneme AI (disappears like a)
breeze blowing through a reed, like the phoneme VA, and (so) the word Bhairava is not
successfully (derived).”
Moreover, it is clearly stated in the second quarter (of this verse) that the
Supreme Lord gives all things and pervades within everything. (Thus,) the second

quarter (essentially) declares that the meaning is that of the two verbs ‘to give’ and ‘to

pervade’. Kṣemarāja and others were not aware of this (interpretation), for at the
beginning of the laudatory verse of (Kṣemarāja’s commentary) the Vijñānoddyota, the
(same) meaning ‘filling’ etc. has been elucidated. (This says: “Bhairava is the Lord
(prabhu) who 1) bestows freedom from fear to those who are timorous (and 2) is the

cause of the cry of fear (bhī) of phenomenal existence, and so is experienced in the Sky
of the Heart. He is the Lord of those who are radiant with the sound of fear and is the

end of death. He is the one who exhausts (vāyati) fear and is transported by His own
Yoginīs. He who is supṛeme, fills (and suṣtains) etc. (everything) within all this
(universe), and whose nature is consciousness (vijnāna), is victorious.” Śivopadhyāya
concludes that ‘the root meaning of this verse is that Bhairava sustains, nourishes,
bestows and pervades all things.’ He then goes on to declare that one should follow the

view taught in the Tantrāloka, and presents the etymologies stated here.

Finally, we note that the etymologies of the word Bhairava are varied.
Śivopādhyāya states that the most popular is that of ‘filling (bharaṇa), ‘resounding’
(ravaṇa) and ‘emittingʼ (vamana), and Kṣemarāja says that these three activities

characterize his nature most specifically. But even so, Abhinavagupta does not present

the third meaning. The Kubjikā Tantras supply yet another variant that is a didactic
(nirvacana) rather than strictly philological etymology. Despite Śivopādhyāya’ s
objections, thisis common practice we find applied to many words and names foundin

the Tantras, just as we find in the much earlier Vedic sources. According to the Kubjikā
Tantras, Bhairava’s name is derived from three roots namely, bhṛ, ram and vam, in the

sense of sustaining, sporting and emitting, respectively. Thus we read in the Śrīānatoṭtara

(1/115-116):

‘What is Bhairava? Bhairava is the one whose nature is to sustain (bharaṇa),
sport (ramaṇa) and emit (vamana). He fills (bharati) with nectar, sports (ramate) with
(his own) energy, and emits (vamate) the essence of knowledge. Thus he is called

Bhairava.

He is called Bhairava because the entire universe is pervaded (vyāpita by him)
and he is the one who sports (ramate) in the Supreme Sky and emits (vamate) the
pervasion of (the energy) who moves in the Void (of consciousness) (Khecarī).”
Similarly, ‘Bhairavī is Śakti. She is called Bhairavī because (she is Bhairava’s
power) to wander (bhramaṇa), sport (ramaṇa) and emit (vamana).’ (commentary on
line 17 of the Mālinīṣtava in Chapter Four of the Kumārikākhaṇḍa. Dyczkowski 2009:
vol 5 p. 234).

VBh 24d. Jayaratha quotes just the last quarter of this verse, which says that ‘by
filling (them thus, the yogi attains) the state of plenitude.’ He is thus suggesting that
Bhairava (‘the One Who fills and is full’) is alluded to here. No doubt, Jayaratha also

TANTRĀLOKA

suggests, presuming that his readers would know, that the entire verse teaches an

important practice to attain or realize the essential plenitude of one’s own Bhairava

consciousness. Swami Lakshmanjoo explains that by this practice the yogi becomes one
with Bhairava, because Bhairava Himself is the state of perfect satisfaction and

plenitude in which nothing is missing, which one comes to experience as one’s own
essential nature by becoming ‘full’. This means realizing by this practice that Bhairava’s
plenitude is that of one’s own nature. This involves first of all establishing clearly by

close attention that the breath ascends and descends along a vertical axis of which the
two extremes are the Heart and the End of the Twelve. According to the depth and

intensity of awareness, the Heart is experienced variously. At the most superficial level,
it is a vital centre in the centre of the chest from which the exhaled breath (prāṇa)
ascends and into which the inhaled breath (apāna) descends. At a deeper level of
awareness, it is the experience of the core of the soul’s pure conscious Being. There are

two major forms of the End of the Twelve. One is the ‘external End of the Twelve’

(bāhyadvādaśānta). Thīs is set at a distance of twelve fingers’ breadth from the point of
exit of the breath from the body. The breath is understood to begin its exit from the
bridge of the nose. The first four finger-breadths therefore cover the length of the nose.
The remaining eight are outside. By placing one’s hand at this distance from the nose

one can feel the subtle sensation of the exhaled breath making contact with it.

The other End of the Twelve is the upper one. This is the so-called Cavity of

Brahmā (brahmarandhra). It īs located at the highest part of the head, that is, at the apex

of the body. In the physical body it marks the suture of the skull that closes soon after
birth. According to the common ancient Indian physiology taught in the Upanisads, it

marks the point of entry of the vital force into the body which carries with it the living

being (jīva) who is to inhabit it. At death it is generally believed that the vital force, and

with it the individual soul, can exit from the body through one or other of its nine
cavities, namely, the two nostrils, two ears, two eyes, genitals and anus. The ninth is the

Cavity of Brahmā. By exiting through that, there is no further rebirth.

We may note here in passing that sometimes the upper End of the Twelve is

said to be located at a distance of twelve finger breadths above this Cavity. The two
possible locations lead to some confusion, but that may sometimes be avoided by

observing the context. But whichever of the two is meant, both are said to be the place
from which the emission (visarga) of the breath, consciousness and vitality into the

body takes place, and so too the emission of contracted, individual consciousness into

the unconfined Expanse of Śiva consciousness. Thus, like the Heart, the End of the

Twelve is not just a power centre in the body. The Heart is the location of the core of

consciousness. It is the centre of our Being which, unconfined in any way, is the infinite

expanse of God consciousness within which all things rest and manifest. Thus, the two

polarities at the two extremes fuse in the movement between them, which is at first
external and then ultimately recognised to be within. The practice, as Swami
Lakshmaṇjoo explains it, is essentially attending to the resonant energy of the breath as

it utṭers the inner Mantra of the breath that resonates within it as the Supreme Goddess

and energy of Śiva consciousness. This is the ‘unuttered’ Mantra HAṀSAḤ, that can be
heard by listening carefully to the sound of the breath. HAMṀ is the sound of inhalation
and SAḤ that of exhalation. Recited the other way around it makes the sound SO

‘HAM, which means ‘I am He’. Although known to many people, it is nonetheless one

of the most important and powerful practices. As all Mantras should be uttered in
consonance with the breath, that is, paying attention to it, this practice can be said to be

one of the most fundamental.
Swami Lakṣshmanjoo explains how it is done. “You have to take the breath
from the Heart to the End of the Twelve and take it from the End of the Twelve to the

Heart again and recite prāṇa [the exhaled breath] and jīva [the inhaled breath]. To recite


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

The reading ‘with these’ (i.e. (gurubhir) imaiḥ — ‘(the teachers have)

with these etymologies’) is doubtful. The reading ‘gurugaditair’ (i.e. ‘spoken by
the teacher (or ‘teachers’ rather than gurubhir imair) is the best reading.”'
(He now) explains (the etymology of) the word ‘deva’ (God).

aī āaā-- || Ḷ o ||
EFHUEIEEME
a-T--ṀĨ
ē-ī gar; |

āīṁ--=-ãN TJfT̄áT: TTĀ 1| Q.2.I|

TTTATIHĪTTJTĀTR

fkārrāī zfrrhrīTīvīa 7r: || go3I

heyopādeyakathā-

virahe ṣvānandaghanatayocchalanam |
krīḍā sarvotkarṣeṇa
vartanecchā tathā svatantratvam || 100 ||
vyavaharaṇam abhinne ʻpi
svātmani bhedena sañjalpaḥ |
nikhilāvabhāsanāc ca
dyotanam asya stutir yataḥ sakalam || 101 ||
tatpravaṇam ātmalābhāt
prāṇa means to recite ‘SA’ in the outward End of the Twelve and the sound ‘AṀ’ of

HAMSAḤ will be recited in the heart. When you take your breath inside it will end with

‘AṀ’, when you take it out it will end in visarga [emission] ‘SAH’ and if you
concentrate at these two starting points, you will become one with Bhairava because of

His fullness.”

” Read imair iti pāṭhaḥ cintyaḥ for imaiḥ iti cintyam. Clearly Jayaratha consulted more

than one manuscript of the Tantrāloka. He must have seen this other reading (i.e.
gurugaditair in place of gurubhir imaiḥ) in a manuscript which was not the main one to
which he referred. Indeed, this is the reading in MS C. It is interesting to observe that

Jayaratha did bother to look at different manuscripts. This must have been common
practice by the learned. Kṣemarāja also refers to other readings in his commentaries on
the Netra and Svacchānda Tantras, as does Abhinava. The practice continued, as we can
clearly observe in the commentaries of the Vijñānabhairava, the manuscripts of which

have a surprisingly large number of significant variant readings. It appears that scholars
stuck to their main manuscript as much as possible, even though readings from others
may sometimes have been, as in this case, considered to be better.

TANTRĀLOKA

prabhṛti samaste `pi kartavye |
bodhātmakaḥ samastakriyāmayo dṛkkriyāguṇaś ca gatiḥ || 102 ||

(God is called ‘deva’™ for the following reasons.) A) Devoid of (any)

considerations (kathā) of a goal to attain or (consequence) to be avoided,
(He plays) the game (krīḍā) of pouring (Himself) out (into cosmic
manifestation) because of His dense (uninterrupted) (ghana) bliss. B) (His)

abiding (and unfailing) intention (vartanecchā) is to be superior to all and

such is (His) freedom (to be so). C) (His varied) behaviour (vyavaharaṇa)
within His own nature which, although undivided, (manifests) as divided
(within it as) the discourse (saṁjalpa) (of conceptual representation). D)
(He is said to be) shining (dyotana) because He makes all things manifest.
E) He is praised (stuti) because everything is inclined towards Him in all
(the various) things it has to do (kartavya) from the (very) moment it attains
a nature of its own. F) (His) proceeding (gati) is awakened consciousness,
which consists of all (His universal) action, and is endowed with the

attributes (of universal) knowledge and action. (100-102) (101-103)

” The word ‘deva’ is derived from the root div which, according to Pāṇini’s list of
roots, means A) ‘play’ (krīḍā), B) ‘desire to excelʼ (vijigīṣā), C) ‘behave variously’
(vwyavahāra), D) ʻshine (dyuti), E) ‘praise (stuti) and F) ‘proceeding’ (gati). In his
commentary on the SvT (ad 1/1-4b) Kṣemarāja sums up these derivations as follows:
tatra devaḥ śivādikṣityantāśeṣasṛṣṭyādikrīdāparaḥ, tāvad aśeṣotkarṣatayā
vijigīṣuḥ,
tadabhinnatvāt
viśvasya
jagadvyavahārarūpatayāpi
dyotamānaḥ,
śivamantramaheśvarādibhiḥ stīūyamānaḥ,
sarveṣām agatīnāṁ gatiḥ prāpyo
‘bhinnabodhasāraś ca, yathoktaṁ "'divu krīdādau" iti |

‘There (the word) ‘deva’ (is derived from the root) divu, which is said (to have
a number of meanings,) namely, play etc. (Thus a ‘deva’ is he who is) 1) intent on the

play of the emanation of everything from Śiva down to a louse. 2) Thus, he desires to

excel by being more excellent than anything (else). 3) As he is (himself) the various
behaviour (vyavahāra) of the universe, 4) he is not divided from it and illumines all
things. 5) He is praised by Śiva, Maṇtramaheśvaras and the rest (of the perceivers). 6)
Heis the way to proceed (gati) of all who have no way (of their own), andis the object

of attainment and essence of undivided consciousness
In his commentary (vivaraṇa) on the Parātrīśikā (p. 7-8), Abhinava supplies a
similar didactic etymology of the word devī (‘goddess’). He writes:

paraiva ca saṅvit devī ity ucyate | iyatā paśyantyādisṛṣṭīkrameṇa

bāhyanīḷādi-paryantena
svavimarśānandātmanā
krīḍanena
saryottīrṇatvena
sarvotkarṣāvasthiteḥ bhagavato bhairavasya tathā sthātum icchayā vijigīṣāmmanā iyad
anantajñānasmr̥tisaṁśayaniścayādi-vyavahārakaraṇena sarvatra ca bhāsamāne
nīlādau tannīlādyātmabhāsanarūpeṇa dyotanena sarvair eva tadīyaprakāśāveśaiḥ
tatpravaṇaiḥ stũyamānatayā yathecchaṁ ca deśa-kālāvacchedena sarvātmatāgamanena
ata eva mukhyato bhairavanāthaṣyaiva devatvam iṣyate tacchakter eva bhagavatyā
devīrūpatā | yad uktam — divukrīḍāvijigīṣā-vyavahāradyutiṣṭutigatiṣu | tathā ca evaṁ
vidhamukhyapāram-aiśvaryamayadevatvāṁśāṁśikānugrahāt

devatāvyavahāraḥ |


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


A) By the greatness of (His) freedom, He pours (Himself) out as the
entire universe beginning with Śiva and ending with Earth. Thisis His ‘game’.

thatis, ‘(His) abiding (and unfailing) intention (vartanecchā) to be superior

to allʼ, and ‘such is (His) freedomʼ to ‘behave (yyavaharaṇa) (variously)
within His own nature which, although undivided (manifests) as the diverse

discourse (sarījalpa) (of conceptual representation)ʼ. He plays™ (this game)
and so He is (called) ‘God’ (deva).™ Nor is there any reason (nimitta) (for Him
to behave this way) apart from (the desire to) play, so he says that (He is):

‘devoid of (any) considerations (kathā) of a goal to attain or (consequence)

to be avoided’. The Lord is not engaged in the creation etc. of the universe in

order to take up or give up anything, thus the accepted reason (for this) here is
(His) ‘dense (uninterrupted) (ghana) bliss’.
B) Thus, His freedom itself is ‘(His) abiding (and unfailing) intention

(vartanecchā) is to be superior to all’, that is, (His) desire to excel (and
transcend). The desire of one who wishes to excel (and transcend) is: ‘how can I
exist (eternally) once having overcome all (others)? The word ‘such’ (tathā) is

a figure of speech conjoining two independent actions (samuccaya) (in this case

the Deitys intention to excel all others and His freedom to be s0). Thus, as He

plays and desires to excel (and transcend) (vijigīṣate), He is (called) ‘deva’.
C) Although He is ‘undivided’ from all this, His ‘discourse (saṁjalpa)

(of conceptual representation) of the sort ‘I know this’ (takes place) ʻwithin

His own natureʼ, ‘as dividedʼ. That is (His) ‘behaviour (vyavaharaṇa)’,

which is (His) manifestation in an (empirical) form, which is not (His) ultimate
‘This supreme (parā) Goddess of Consciousness is called ‘devṝ’ for six
reasons. (These are) a) because (she plays) the game (krīdana) which is that of the bliss
of her reflective awareness (of herself) in the process of emanation (through the various
forms of Speech,) beginning with that of Vision (pasyantī) up to the external
(manifestation of phenomena,) such as (the colour) blue and the rest. b) (She is called

‘devī’) because She wishes to be as is Lord Bhairava who, tran

excels them all, (and so that wish is) the desire to be victorious (vi
called ‘devī’) because she gives rise to the activity of daily life (vyavahāra), which
(consi
in this measure of the endless (forms of cognition) such as knowledge (born
of direct perception), memory, doubt, certainty, and the like. d) (Sheis called ‘devī’)
because when (phenomena) such as (the colour) blue and the like manifest, (she) shines
(dyotana) in the form of that manifestation which is (the colour) blue and the like. e)
(She is called ‘devī’) because (all phenomena) into which her light has penetrated are
propense towards her as (she who is) praised (and celebrated by them). f) (She is called
‘devī’) because she assumes the nature of all things by limiting (herself) in space and
time (freely) as she wishes. Thus, (for all these reasons,) the status of deity is considered

to belong primarily to the Lord Bhairava and ‘devī’ only to His blessed power. Thus, the

root div has all the aforementioned meanings, that is, play (krīḍā), desire to win
(vijiigīṣā), activity (vyavahāra), praise (stuti) and proceeding (gati). Viṣṇu, Brahmā and
others function as gods by the grace of their being (secondary, partial) aspects of the

divinity which consists of the primary supreme lordship whichis such.

” Read dīvyati for devyati.

” In his commentary on the Bhagavadgītā (p. 34), Abhinava preṣents the same

etymology with respect to the deities (devāḥ) of the senses (karaṇeśvarī), which are the
functions of the senses (indriyavṛtti) as taught in the secret scriptures (rahasyaśāstra),

that is, in the Krama teachings.

TANTRĀLOKA

nature (apāramārthikarāpa). This is the meaning. Thus, as He plays and

behaves (variously) (vyavaharati) (in this way in the world), He is (called)
‘deva’.

D) The manifestation of ‘all things’, that is, subjects and objects, and
His (manifestation) within all things, is His ‘shining’. Thus, as He plays and
shines (dyorate) or illumines (dyotayati), He is (called) ‘deva’.

E) ‘He is praised (stuti) because everythingʼ, that is, this universe,

‘from the (very) moment it attains a nature of its ownʼ its activity depends
upon Him ‘in all (the various things) it has to do’. The sense is that the

activity (pravṛtti) of all (the perceivers), namely, Śiva, Mantramaheśvaras, and

the rest (of the series of seven types of perceivers),’” depends on Him, and so,

because they are propense (towards Him), bow (to Him). Thus, He is (called)

‘deva’ because he plays (dīvyate) and is praised (stāyate).

F) The nature of His action is ‘universal’, that is, full (and all

embracing) reflective awareness, and His attribute, that is, (His) energy, is
knowledge and action. Thus, as He is such, His ‘proceeding (gati), which, as it
does not assume (any particular form), is (His) noetic consciousness (jñāna)

which is everywhere, and (so too is His) unfolding. Thus, it is established that

He is omniscient and all-pervasive. Or else, therefore, as He plays, knows
(jānāti) and unfolds (prasarati) (everywhere), He is (called) ‘deva’.


He concludes this (topic) saying:


II TṬĒĨ. TTI ēaI; |
iti nirvacanaiḥ śivatanuśāstre gurubhiḥ smṛto devaḥ |

These are the etymologies by which the teacher refers to God (deva)

in the Śivatanuśāstra.” (103ab) (103ef)

There is a contrast necessarily posited by nondualist schools of Indian philosophy,

understood variously, between what one could call the daily commerce of life

(vyavahāra) and a supreme, ultimate reality (paramārtha). A’ distinction is made

between ‘truth’ or ‘reality’ in what is common daily life and that which is ‘supreme’
(para) and ‘other (para) than that. For some schools, this contrast is understood on the
model of what we experience when dreaming with respect to when we are awake. From

this perspective, the world of daily life has no more reality than a dream. This is not the
view here, although the distinction is maintained. Deity acts on both levels — that of

daily life and the supreme, ultimate one. Both are real and always the one reality. The

former is Deity that appears as all things; the latter Deity as it is in itself as supreme
subject. From the perspective of the individual subject, the former is the world of daily

life. The domain of duality and transitoriness, it is not ultimate, although not unreal. It is

other than (apara) Deity in its oneness which, with respect to it is, other (para) and
supreme (para). Cf. below, note 1,1056.

” See above, note to 1/77ab-80ab (1/77-80).

” Bṛhaspati, who wrote the Śivatanuśāstra, was an early Siddhāntin who wrote

independent works, like Sadyojotis, who was the first to do so. Rāmakaṇṭha refers to
them together in the introductory verses to his commentary on the Mokṣakārikā.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


The meaning is that ‘the teacher°, that is, the venerable Bṛhaspati,
describes (the Deity in the Śivatanuśāstra) with the verses beginning with: “He

who is this God (deva) plays (dīvyati). He sports and so is the Lord’,™ and
ending with: “As God’s state is (never) disturbed, he is therefore praised as

Sadāśiva (Always Auspicious).”’

Now, beginning with (the words,) ‘by teaching’, he gives the etymology

of the words Pati (‘Lord’) and Śiva.

JIĪHTTĪ¥-TTTGTTTĪTaṇrīṛcā ṃdīŪēg+ || 203 1

śāsanarodhanapālana-

pācanayogāt sa saryam upakurute || 103 |I

tena patiḥ śreyomaya
eva śivo nāśivaṁ kim api tatra |

He is (called) the ‘Lord’ (pati) because by teaching (śāsana),

obstructing

(rodhana),

protecting

(pālana)

and

maturing

(pācana)

(Karma), He helps all beings. He is Śiva (the Auspicious One) (because)

He is the supreme good (śreyomaya) and there is nothing inauspicious
(aśiva) there (within Him). (103cd-104ab)
‘Teaching’ is the awakening (bodhana) of those who are to be

awakened by means of the teaching of the scripture and the like. ‘Blocking’

Bṛhaspati most probably preceded Somānanda, the author of the Śivadrṣṭi (Torella 1994;

intro. p. 13 n). Although he was a Siddhāntin, Abhinava was clearly fond of his work
the Śivatanuśāṣtra, which he quotes six more times in the Tantrāloka (below, 8/231ab,
264ab, 300ab, 302ab, 346ab (8/230, 263, 299, 301, 345) and 9/206ab (9/206)), although
admittedly not much in his other, later works. Indeed, only once in the ĪPv (vol. 1 p.

317).
” Omit ‘evaṁ’, as do MSs Ch, J, Jh, Ñ. T and Ḍ, and read yo ‘sau with MS T instead of
Vvamo.

The short phrases Jayaratha cites indicate that Abhinava has considerably adapted his

original source.

This and the following verse are also most probably drawn from the Śivatanuśāstra.

This would make sense. Bṛhaspati is supplying the etymology of important names of

Śiva, the Deity of the Śaiva Siddhānta, i.e ‘Mahādeva, Sadāśiva, Pati and Śiva.

Jayaratha quotes a verse from the Mṛgendratantra which may well have inspired the
first part of this verse.
There is a play of words here. ‘Śiva’ means ‘auspicious, propitious, gracious,

favourable, benign, kind, benevolent, friendly, and dear. It is also, of course, a proper
name. The meanings, as an adjective of Pati or proper name, are implicitly connected by
saying that he is ‘the supreme good (śreyomaya)’. Similarly, Śiva is called ‘Śaṅkara’
because He does (kara) what is ‘śam’, that is, the supreme good (śreyas). See

Dyczkowski 1992: 339 note 4.

TANTRĀLOKA

those who are subject to the round of transmigration because they are affected
by the (binding) power of destruction (means) placing them there (in that

fettered state). ‘Protecting’ is the act of protection, which is the establishment

in that same way (within consciousness) of the wonderful variety of the
universe by (the application of) the constraint of the fixed (principles of Karma
and natural law). The ‘maturing’ of Karmas is the production of a propensity
with regards to those engaged in Karma to give (rise to) their fruits (and so

exhaust them). Indeed, it is said (in the Mṛgendratantra):

“(He is engaged in) awakening (bodhayan) those who are fit to be

awakened, even in (the period of cosmic) sleep, and obstructing (rundhan) those

who should be obstructed, maturing (pācayan) (the consequences of the) Karma

of those engaged in action, making (prakurvan) the powers of Māyā fit (and
ready) to be made manifest,' (even as He continues) seeing (paśyan) all things

just as they are.””

‘Thus’ the reason (why He is called the Lord) is because (He) teaches
etc., even though the word ‘pati’ (itself) ultimately means ‘protection’. This is
the meaning. Thus ‘paṁ’ (the Lord) is He who protects (paāti, rakṣati). He is ‘the

According to the common Śaiva Siddhānta theory of Karma, when Karma is fully
mature, Śiva graces the soul and so releases it from Karma. This view is criticized
below 13/54 ff.

Mṛgendravidyāpāda 4/15. Commonly quoted in Siddhānta sources, for example in

the Tattvaniṛṇayavṛút by Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha ibid ad 28, Nareśvaraparkṣā ad 231, p.
153 and Kiraṇavṛtti ad 4/17.

Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha comments on this verse from the dualist Siddhānta point of

view:

jāgradavasthāyām
iva
.svāpāvasthāyām
api
malaparipākatāratamyāpekṣayā
bodhanārhān bodhayan, rodhanārhān rodhanaśaktyā rundhan, karmiṇāṁ karmāṇi
pariṇāmayan,

ca
prasavābhimukhīḥ
kurvan,
sarvaṁ
cidacittattvabhāvabhūtabhuvanātmakaṁ yathāvad avalokayann āṣṭe | yad yatheti na tv
asmadādivat ayathā vastvavabhāso ‘apy asya bhavatīti vakṣyāmaḥ |

‘(He is engaged) in awakening those who deserve to be awakened in the dream
state also, as in the waking state, in accord with the degree in which (their) Impurity has

matured. He is obstructing those who deserve to be obstructed by (his) power of
obstruction, as he changes the Karmas of those engaged in action (into their
consequences). (He does this) as he makes the powers of Māyā propense to give birth

(to their effects,) and abides observing everything properly, be it conscious or
unconscious principles, phenomena (bhāva), gross elements (bhūta) and worlds. We say

that the manifestation of an entity is just as it is, certainly not as it is not, such as, for
example, oneself (asmadādivat).”

Read with edition of the Mṛgendra and MSs Ch, J, h, Ñ, and T: paśyan sarvaṁ for
sarvaṁ paśyan. MS N adds 1/104ab tena patiḥ sreyomaya eva sivo nāśivaṁ kim api
tatra. `Thus, He is (called) ‘Pati’ (the Lord), the auspicious one (śiva) who is the

supreme good (śreyomaya) itself and there is nothing at all inauspicious (asiva) there
(within Him).


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


supreme

good’

because

He

is

the

supreme

nondual

(reality).

(By)

‘inauspiciousʼ (is meant) duality (which is completely absent in the Lord).’

Surely (one may ask,) even if this is so, what is the use of adding

adjectives (to the Lord’s name)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

GaāEeaivEenGEHṈICNAHII
TTṬTGTRTTJIṬU eISEIĀ
īdṛgrūpaṁ kiyad api
rudropendrādiṣu sphured yena || 104 ||
tenāvacchedanude
paramamahatpadaviśeṣaṇam upāttam |

This same kind of nature is also manifest to a certain degree (in the

minor gods) such as Rudra and Upendra. Thus, the adjectives ‘supreme’
and ‘great’ are added (to His name) to preclude (the mistaken idea that) He
is limited. (104cd-105ab)

‘This same kind (of nature), as explained in terms conforming to the
meaning of the words Bhairava etc., is ‘to a certain degree’, that is, not in all
(respects, manifest in other deities). The sense is that (the Lord’s nature) can be
(present) everywhere (in all other deities also, but only) in (some) aspects. Thus,
the adjectives ‘supreme’” and ‘great’ are used (to describe the Lord) to
distinguish (Him) from other (deities,) in order to teach that He is the most

excellent of all.
Surely (one may ask,)

ignorance is the instrumental

cause of

transmigration (sarṣṛti), and knowledge that of liberation (from it). Again,

ignorance is the lack of knowledge of one’s own essential nature, whereas
knowledge is the knowledge of that. One’s own essential nature is the supreme
Light (of consciousness). Covering its own nature by its own free will, it

manifests (its own nature as) the universe. Although this is so, its (own) power

itself is the means (upāya) to realize that (Light) by which knowledge of one’s
own (true) nature is possible (bhavet). (So) one should know just this much,

namely, that which is the object of explanation of all the scriptures, and that has
largely been explained here. Thus, one should stop (here and not continue
further with the Tantrāloka). With this doubt in mind, he says:
The Exposition of the Tantrāloka
The word ‘aśiva’ means both ‘inauspicious’ and ‘not Śiva. Translatingin accord

with the other meaning, we get ‘thereis nothing thatis not Śiva (aśiva) thereʼ. So the
‘inauspiciousʼ is absence of Śiva, whichis duality.

7 These lines are also most probably drawn from the Śivatanu. If so, we should

understand that the word generic word ‘deva’ — ‘god’ — for Śiva, of which Brṛhaspati has
supplied the etymology,is an abbreviation of Mahādeva, whichis a well-known proper

name of Śiva.

TANTRĀLOKA

a√ād ahōaākaāT || 2, 1

iti yaj jñeyasatattvaṁ darśyate tac chivājñayā || 105 I|
mayā svasaṁvitsattarkapatiśāstratrikakramāt |
Thus, I will expound, at Śiva’s command, according to my own
consciousness, sound discriminative reasoning (sattarka), Śaiva doctrine

(patiśāstra), Trika and Krama, the true nature of what needs be known.
(105cd-106ab)
This is the introduction (which ends here).”™ ‘Thus’ʼ, 1 will now

expound at length ‘at Śiva’s command’ on the basis of ‘my own
consciousnessʼ etc. what has been outlined briefly here in the aforementioned

” This is not a text. Rather it is a generic term for the common basic form of Āgamic

Śaivism, i.. the Śaivasiddhānta. Jayaratha says as much in ad TĀ 1/105cd-106ab (106).

It may also mean its scriptures and related works. Cf. TĀv ad 4/253 and TĀ 16/254-256

(254cd-257ab).

”" have translated following Jayaratha, as I must. Another possible translation could be

“. . . Śaiva doctrine and Trika, in due order°. Although this is not the meaning accepted
by Jayaratha, it is more likely — why would Abhinava place Krama above Trika?
Moreover, Abhinava’s Anuttara Trika includes the Krama teachings as it does the


Pratyabhijñā and Spanda. However, it seems to me that the best translation is as follows:


‘Thus, I will expound, at Śiva’s command, according to the three (trika),
namely, the sound discriminative reasoning (sattarka) (inherent in) my own
consciousness, the Lord (who is my teacher) and scripture, in due order (—kramāt), the

true nature of what needs be known.”

The due order would be the reverse one. First comes scriptural revelation, then

‘the Lordʼ, who I take to be the teacher, and the last is the sound reasoning based on the

personal experience of one’s own consciousness. This triad mirrors a standard set of
three validating sources, namely, scripture, the teacher and one’s own insight (see
below, 4/78cd-79). The characterizing quality of a true teacher is his discerning

reasoning which, distinguishing between what should be rejected and what is to be
adopted, is the result and basis of the purification of his notions concerning their identity

as Siva first and then those of his disciple. The same discernment allows the teacher to
distinguish what is most relevant and important in the scriptural revelation which he

teaches to his disciple. Indeed, this is the basis on which Abhinava wrote his Tantrāloka
based on carefully selected passages from the scripture and his teachers’ instruction.

”! The introduction began above at verse 22. In the introduction, Abhinava has dealt

with the basics of his metaphysics, theology and practice under the five headings we
have noted, namely, 1) knowledge and ignorance, 2) innate and intellectual knowledge
and ignorance, 3) nature and character of consciousness, 4) Śiva the possessor of power
and His power, 5) the Divine Names. Now he begins with the exposition itself. The

point of entry into Anuttara Trika is, of course, practice. Accordingly, Abhinava begins

with that. In this chapter, he first presents an overview of practice, that is, the means to
realisation (upāya). This is followed by what is essentially an index of the contents of
the Tantrāloka, first just chapter headings, and then headings of the sections into which
the chapters are divided, which is followed by Jayaratha and in the translation.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


way about ‘the true nature of what needs to be known’, namely, the true

ultimate nature of bondage and liberation etc., (which is possible) because other

scriptures (śāstra) (of various schools) have been (well) examined. This is the

meaning. Here ‘Śiva’ is (Abhinava’s) teacher (i.e., Śambhunātha).”

‘He who is the teacher is said to be Śiva. He Who is Śiva is considered
to be the teacher. Śiva and the teacher — there is no difference between either of

The point is that without permission (ādesśa) (of the teacher who is Śiva)

there is no competence here (to expound the teachings). (One’s) ‘own

consciousness’
(means)
one’s
own
(personal)
experience.

discriminative reasoning’ (means) (the application of) reason (yukti) (based on

the understanding and practice of the teachings as a means to gain insight into
ultimate reality).”™ (Siddhānta) ‘Śaiva doctrine’ (patiśāstra) (which represents
the basic, common public form of) Śaivism that is predominantly dualist.
‘Trika is the school (śāstra) that expounds (the nature of) the three powers,

Parā (Parāparā and Aparā). Krama is (the teaching concerning) the Four-fold

Reality (catuṣṭayārtha). Taken together, this is a copulative compound (in

77 Jayaratha says that Śiva’ is the teacher. This is most probably not what he literally

meant, as Abhinava did not. Rather the teacher is Śiva. And this could only be

Abhinava’s Trika teacher, Sambhunātha. This is the concluding verse of the

introḍuction (upodghāta) to the TĀ. TṬhus, Abhinava is declaring that he wrote the
Tantrāloka at Sambhunātha’s command. In other words, he was authorized to do so by
his teacher. He attained the capacity and authority (adhikāra) which rendered him fit to
undertake this great task from his Trika teacher Sambhunātha. His purpose (prayojana)

was to give his students and peers a liturgical manual of Trika ritual and to write a
commentary on the MV, and so expound Trika Śaivism, also taught in other Trika
scriptures. The purpose of that (prayojanaprayojana) was that others may benefit from
it (bhoga), and to lead to liberation (mokṣa) those so desired to attain it. The name
(abhidhāna) of the work is ‘Tantrāloka’.

” The verse refers, of course, to a Śaiva teacher. Cf. below 16/256cd (257ab).
T” According to Monier-Williams’ dictionary, the relevant meanings of the word yukti

are: `a trick, contrivance, means, expedient, artifice, cunning device, magic, to find out

or employ an expedient; by device or stratagem, artfully, skilfully, under pretext or
pretence; reasoning, argument, proof, inference, induction, and deduction from
circumstances by means of an argument.” As we shall see in detail in Chapter Four,
‘Sound Reasoning’ — sattarka — which is developing discriminating insight applied to
understanding the ultimate purport of the scripture, is the basis of the Empowered
Means (śāktopāya). Reflection on the meaning of scripture in general, and the

Tantrāloka in particular, coupled with a developing experience of the dynamism of

consciousness, is a kind of contemplative practice (bhāvanā) that serves to purify
thought of false notions progressively until one reaches the clarity of the direct and
profound insight that one’s own true nature and that of all things is nothing but pure

consciousness, which is Śiva Himself.

The term ‘yukti’ also denotes a meditative technique or practice. The 112

practices taught in the Vijāānabhairava, for example, are called ‘dhāraṇas’ —

‘meditationsʼ. They are also called ‘yuktiś’ — which Swami Lakshmaṇjoo translates as
‘tricks’. They are ‘tricks because they ‘trick’ the dull, ignorant, worldly mind into

atṭaining higher states of consciousness.

7 See above, note 1,659.

TANTRĀLOKA

which the members form a list). Here everything that is taught is proved by

one’s own experience and sound discriminative reasoning, in accord with (both)

the common (Śaiva) scriptures (accepted by all Śaiva schools) and the particular
ones (of our specific traditions)."® This is the tradition (āgama). (The word)

” The ‘āgama’ (iterally ‘that which has come’ down to us) are the scriptures and their
teachings, which may also be just orally transmitted. They fall into two broad
categories. They may be ‘common’ (sāmānya), that is, generally accepted by all
Śaivites. From the Trika point of view, these are the Siddhānta Āgamas. They may also
be ‘particular’, or specific to one's own particular school. These are also arranged along

the same gradation, from common to increasingly particular or specific. Again, from the
Trika point of view, essentially they are the Bhairava Tantras and the Kaula Tantras that

are derived from them. The most ‘general’ and ‘common’ from this perspective are

essentially two. One is the Nerratantra, which teaches the cult of Mṛtyuñjaya Śiva,
otherwise called Amṛteśa. It does not affiliate itself to any one of the four pīṭhas, i.e.
‘groups’ or categories of Bhairava Tantras. The other is the Svacchandatantra, that
belongs to the Mantrapītha. The other relevant Bhairavatantras belong to the
Vidyāpīṭha. A primary feature of the Bhairava Tantras is the prominent presence of
goddesses (see below, 37/24cd-25ab). Along with the Mantra-, Mudrā- and Maṇḍala-pīthas (i.e. ‘collections’), the Vidyāpīṭha is one of four divisions of the Bhairava
Tantras (Dyczkowski 1986: 104 ff.). This system of classification is taken as basic by
Abhinava himself, who presents the Vidyāpītha as the most excellent of the four (see
below 36/17-24ab). Tantras continued to ascribe themselves to the Vidyāpīṭha up to the
development of the Kubjikā Tantras, some of which also do so. However, the Tantras of

the Śrīvidyā school, which is the last great Tantric system in the chain of development

of the early Śaiva and Kaula Tantric systems, do not do so. Indeed, they do not refer to

this system of classification at all. Sanderson (1986) has described in depth the

importance and characteristic features of the Tantras of the Vidyāpīṭha. The word

‘Vidyā’ in this context denotes the Mantras of female deities, which dominate the praxis
of these Tantras.

The Brahmayāmala is amongst the first Tantras of the Vidyāpīṭha. Also called
Picumata (the Teaching of the Yoginī called Picu), 12,000 verses long, it is the prime

representative of the so-called Mata Tantras. The Bhairava of this Mata is called

Kaāpālīśa, the Lord of the Skull. His consort is Caṇḍākāpālinī. (See below note to TĀv

ad 4/63cd-64). Teaching practices (including sexual ones) performed in the cremation
ground, Sanderson has described this as a Kāpālika Tantra. Sections have been edited,

translated and studied (see bibliography). Probably belonging to the same period (7"

cent CE?) is the Siddhayogeśvarīmata (also called Siddhayogīśvarīmata), the first Trika

Tantra. Abhinava often quotes it here in the Tantrāloka. He considers it so important

that he takes it as an exemplary model of the stages through which scripture is

transmitted (below, 36/1-10). A recension of that has been recovered has been partially
edited and studied. The Tantrasadbhāva is the next Trika Tantra in chronological order.

The present writer has partially edited it and made it available for others to continue the

work. It is likely that the Mālinīvijayottara was redacted after that. These and the
Triśirobhairava and Devyāyāmala, that have not survived, are the major representatives
of the ground layer of Trika scripture, characterized by the absence of its self-

characterization as Trika. The next layer consists of Tantras of which we know only
from references. These do know themselves as Trika. An example is the Trikasāra —
‘the Essence of Trika’, also called Trikahṛdaya — ‘the Heart of Trika’. Abhinava’s

Anuttara Trika is the third and ‘most excellent’ — anuttara — Trika.

Another line of development in the Vidyāpītha begins with the massive
Jayadrathayāmala, which consists of four ṣaṭkas of approximately 6,000 verses each.
This is largely a compendium of ritual practices — kalpa — centred on numerous forms of


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘upodghāta’ (meaning ‘introduction’, is formed from the prefix) ‘upa’ (which

means) Ś‘quickʼ’, that is, ‘conciselyʼ, (and udghāta which means) ‘strikeṣ’

(hanyate), that is, ‘impresses’, above and below (i.e. from the beginning to the

end) within it the meaning of the scripture, like the name of a king (punched
onto the upper and lower side of) a coin.

The Deployment of Bhairava’s Energies and the Supremacy
of the Assembly of Twelve Goddesses

Having in this way declared the (next) subject, in order to present it by
encompassing the (essential) purport of the scriptures, he now says:

Taā JTTd TATTTRTĀĪ
TĪTT TĀTTHT. II 20, |1|

tasya śaktaya evaitās tīsro bhānti parādikāḥ || 106 ||
sr̥ṣṭau sthitau laye turye tenaitā dvādaśoditāḥ |
(Śiva) has just these three powers, namely, (the Goddess) Parā
(Supreme) and the rest (that is, Parāparā (Middling) and Aparā (Lower)).

They manifest in (the phases of) creation, persistence, withdrawal and the
Fourth (that both includes and transcends them).” Thus (they) have arisen
twelve-fold.” (106cd-107ab)
Kālīs and related goddesses. The main form of Kālī here, who is identified with
Caṇḍayogeśvarī, is Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. The most secret kalpas are considered to be Kaula.
Here are the roots of the worship of the 13 Kālīs (reduced by Abhinavagupta to twelve)

(see below 4/148ff.) and the beginnings of the Krama system. A few short independent
Kaālīkrama Tantras that have been recovered developed from these seeds, for example,
the Kramasadbhāva and the Kālīkulapañcaśatika (which Jayaratha calls the

Devipañcaśatika). In this line, about the middle of the 9" century, Śivānanda, also called
Jñānanetra, received a new revelation from Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī in Uddiyāna, the Northern
Seat (uttarapīṭha), located in the Swat Valley close to Kashmir. He established a new

lineage of transmission of the teachings that climaxed in the fully fledged Krama
system. These then are the main examples of the ‘particular’ scriptures of this tradition

that Abhinava incorporates, along with the ‘common’ ones, into his Anuttara Trika as
revelations amplifying and sustaining his primary scripture, the Mālinīvijayottara. For
an example of how the scriptures at various levels work together, see below TĀv ad

4/251 and notes.
” The word ‘ghāta’ (of upodghāta — ‘introduction’) is derived from the root ‘han’, in

the sense of ‘striking (a blow)ʼ. According to Jayaratha, the introduction ends here, and

I must follow suit, although Abhinava himself considers that the exposition of the
Tantrāloka begins with verse 52. This is where he says the introduction ends in his

Tantrasāra. See note 1,533, where the passage from the Tantrasāra is translated.
” Cf. below, 33/30.
Cf. below, 5/25-27ab. Significantly, Abhinava begins his exposition of practice and,

indeed, the whole of the Tantrāloka following the introduction to it by referring to the
Twelve Kālīs, which he thus implicitly presents as the foundation of all Anuttara Trika
practice. Repeatedly Abhinava and his commentator declare that Śiva’s power — śakti —

TANTRĀLOKA

is the means to realizing Him. In the verses that follow, we are told why, namely, that
the one Śakti as the Twelve Kāḹīs is Śiva’s all-embracing plenitude, the perfection in all
respects that is Who He is.
Abhinava sets out by expounding first of all what ‘needs to be known’ most

essentially. Indeed, like the Upaniṣadic Brahman, the Imperishable, it is that ‘knowing

which all things are known’ (The opening statement of the Mānḍukyopaṇiṣad).
There are two reasons for this. One is that the three goddesses Parā, Parāparā

and Aparā, which are the core of Trika worship, are understood to encompass all three

domains in which reality manifests. These are the subject (mātrṛ), cognitive
consciousness (vijñāna), which is the means of knowledge (pramāṇa) operating through
the senses and mental apparatus, and the object of knowledge (meya) (see below 4/125).
In each sphere, consciousness flows through the process of emanation from
consciousness, persistence within it, and withdrawal back into it of all that is in its

domain. The Fourth condition is consciousness itself in relation to each one and which
encompasses all three, collectively and individually. It is identified with
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, also called Mātṛṣadbhāva (see above, 3/178ab-178cd (3/177-178ab),

4/177 and below, 15/348ab-349ab (15/347cd-48)), the Goddess of the Krama (see

below, 3/68ab-70ab (3/68cd-70) and 33/30-31ab). Twelve-fold, as the twelve Kālīs,

embraces
everything
in
the
domain
of
objectivity
(= Apara), the means of knowledge (i.e. mind and senses) (= Parāparā), and the
perceiver (= Parā) in this way within the dynamism of consciousness. The latter is called
the ‘Inexplicable’ (anākhya), because it cannot be defined either sequentially, as this
process, nor is it other than that, even as it transcends both alternatives (below, 4/178c-

180ab). By identifying the Krama goddess and her hypostases with the Trika goddess

Parā (4/176) and her forms, Abhinava masterfully integrates Krama doctrine into Trika

(see Sanderson 2007: 71-75). Abhinava is so concerned to establish these equivalences

that he virtually repeats what he says here in Chapter Four with reference to the
Empowered Means (śāktopāya) (4/25-26ab), and again in Five with reference to the
Individual Means (āṇavopāya) (5/24cd-27ab). Moreover, he manages in this way,
despite the total absence of reference to the Krama in the Mālinīvijayottara, to present it
as the ultimate essence, and hence, the highest form of the Trika teachings. As
Sanderson (2006: 74) explains: ‘it is this set of twelve, rather than the three or four

goddesses of the Trika proper, which Abhinavagupta declares to be 'the principal circuit

of the divine Powers' (mukhyaṁ śakticakram) in which Bhairaya's nature is most fully
manifest. AIl the other sets of emanations worshipped in the various Śaiva systems of
ritual (kalpaḥ) are, he claims, the condensation or expansion of these.”
In the following verses, Abhinava explains that this (Parā/Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī) is

the one power which thus twelve-fold encompasses all the others and so is Śiva's

plenitude (pūrṇatā), which the Pratyabhijñā teaches is His freedom (svātantrya) and

reflective awareness (vimarśa). Abhinava implicitly declares in a passage in Tantrasāra

(p. 27) that this one power is the ultimate of all the major traditions, named in various

ways. More specifically, Abhinava continues:

‘Consciousness shines in its plenitude by the realisation that it is this (allencompassing) totality of (all) its powers. And the powers (of the Lord) are numberless.
Indeed, how much can be said (about them)? These powers are the universe. How can
they (all) be taught (in the scriptures)? (However), everything is summated in (just)
three (of them). (One is) the venerable Supreme (parā) power, by means of which the
Supreme Lord sustains, perceives and makes manifest this (entire reality, comprised in
the thirty-six principles (tattva) beginning with) Śiva up to Earth (in a state of oneness)
as just (pure) inconceivable consciousness. (The second one is) His venerable Middling
(parāparā) power, by means of which (He makes the same reality manifest) as a unity


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘He’ is the Supreme Lord who is the object of denotation of the words
Bhairava etc. ‘These three powers, namely, (the Goddess) Parā (Supreme)

and the rest (that is, Parāparā (Middling) and Aparā (Lower)), have been

declared (by the Trika scriptures) to be the main ones, as they encompass within
themselves all the other powers. They manifest radiantly in a form which is the

nature of all the others ‘in creation, persistence, withdrawal, and the Fourth
(that both includes and transcends them)’, that is, the Inexplicable
(Anākhya). Thus, as each one has four forms, (they) arise twelve-fold as the

(Twelve Kālīs,) beginning with the venerable Sṛṣṭi Kālī. This is the meaning
of (this) statement. That is said (in the following passage):

"By being associated with the sequence of creation (persistence,

withdrawal and the Fourth state), the condition of (each of) these three abodes is
also four-fold. In this way, the supreme Sun which is one’s own consciousness,

imperishable and its body Light,™ has dawned twelve-fold.”

along with diversity (bhedābheda), as are (images reflected in a) mirror (devoid of mass
and measure, as happens when, for example, with the reflected image of) an elephant.
(The third is) His venerable Lower (aparā) power, through which (He makes all things

manifest, whether subjects or objects in the modality in which they are) mutually

distinct from one another, that is, as separate (and divided) (bhedena).
(AII three are the one) Goddess, namely, the venerable Parā Who, embracing
this three-fold contemplation (dhāraṇa) within Herself, consumes it within (Her)
synthetic contemplation (anusandhāna) of it. (Thus, She is also) called by such names
as the venerable Mātṛṣadbhāva (the Essence of (all) Subjects) and Kālakarṣiṇī (the

Destroyer of Time). Each one of these four energies (Parā, Parāparā, Aparā and the

Goddess Parā identified with Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī) are each, by virtue of the freedom (of
consciousness,) of three kindsin emanation, persistence and withdrawal, and so they are
twelve.”

” Abhinava expounds the twelve Kālīs of Krama doctrine below in 4/148-172.
” This passage is clearly drawn from a Krama source. It refers in the manner that is
usual in these sources to the dawning of the solar Wheel of twelve Kālīs. As we shall

see in Chapter Four, and as was pointed out in the Introduction, this fundamental Krama
teaching is the centrepiece of what Abhinava understands to be the most esoteric
teaching of Anuttara Trika. Although similar formulations are common in the Kālīkrama
(also called Kālīkula) sources that have survived, I have not been able to trace this verse
there.

This passage is not from Śivānanda’s Kramastotra. He followed the thirteen

Kaālī system. This one (with a thirteenth Kālī in the centre) was the basic and most
common. Abhinava’s presentation of just twelve Kālīs thus stands out with respect to

the others. This passage is thus either by him, which is unlikely as Jayaratha would

signal it as such, or by a person who followed that system. He may be after Abhinava, as
is the anonymous author of one of the three texts called Mahānayaprakāśa. If before, it
indicates that there were precedents for Abhinava’s view. But there is no evidence of
that, nor is it likely.

”Ṁ Instead of ‘prakāśavapur ayyayaḥ’ “which is imperishable and its body Light’, MS

D: prakāśapuram avyaya() — ‘whichis imperishable and the abode of Light’.

7 Itis commonly believedin India that there are twelve forms of the sun, one for each

of the twelve zodiacal solar months. To these correspond the twelve Kālīs, who are as
many phases or energies of the cycle of the means of knowledge (pramāṇacakra),
identified with the Sun. In its immanent form it is dynamic cognitive consciousness, of

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask,) it has been logically established that there is just

one Supreme Lord Who is the Supreme Light (of consciousness, variously)

called Bhairava etc., and that He possesses just one power called ‘freedomʼ,
which is not separate (from Him). So how is it that here He is said to arise

twelve-fold? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Ṁa: Ṁdīa Ṁ-īd || q0 11]

aīraāTcāāa ̄tftzaī |
tāvān pūrṇasvabhāvo ʻsau paramaḥ Śiva ucyate || 107 ||
tenātropāsakāḥ sākṣāt tatraiva pariniṣṭhitāḥ |
He who is this much (tāvān) is full (and complete), and (so) is said to
be Supreme Siva. Thus, those who worship (these twelve aspects) here are
evidently well-established there (in Siva’s nature). (107cd-108ab)
‘This much’ is His extent namely, (these) twelve energies, and so it is

said that (being such,) ‘His nature is full (and complete)ʼ. Everything is

present within (Śiva’s nature, which is) full (and all-encompassing), and it is

full (and unlimited) everywhere, otherwise He would not possess (that)
plenitude (of consciousness and Being).™ Thus ‘those who worship here’

within the Wheel of Twelve (Kaālīs) ‘are well established there’ within

Supreme Śiva, and are one with Him.” This is the meaning. This is a very
extensive doctrine that requires (detailed) exposition, and so will be discussed at
length in (Chapter Four which deals with) the Empowered Means (to
realisation).” So (we will not engage in this) laborious task here.

Surely (one may ask,) how can that be right insofar as here in various
places (in the scriptures) the number (of energies in any given configuration)

may be more or less?”™™ With this doubt in mind, he says:

which subject and object are the polarities between which it oscillates. Analogously, as

we shall see, the cycle of sixteen energies is the Moon of the object of perception. The
Fire with eight energies is the subject (see below, 4/122cd ff.).

Ṃ Every single thing, however vast, however small, is contained within Śiva’s all-

embracing nature. And that same all-embracing nature is in every single thing, however
vast, however small, individually just as it is in everything, altogether. If that were not

so, Śiva’s plenitude would be nought.

The Twelve Kālīs cover the full expanse of Śiva’s consciousness — supreme,

middling and lower, in all the phases of manifestation, included within which is His
transcendent, inexplicable unity. The Twelve Kaālīs are the most completely explicit

representation of Siva’s all-embracing nature which, becoming all things, is everything
even as it transcends everything as the one consciousness without a second. Here then is
the reason for the paramount place Abhinava gives to the Twelve Kālīs in his Anuttara

Trika. This also explains why ultimately all practice leads to the supreme experience of

this dynamism, through which liberation is achieved.

See 4/122cd ff.

” The question here is very pertinent. Why should the configuration (cakra) of twelve
Śaktis be considered to be superior to all the others?


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


|I zo0¢
STḤ11

tāsām api ca bhedāṁśanyūnādhikyādiyojanam || 108 II

tatsvātantryabalād eva śāstreṣu paribhāṣitam |

The scriptures explain that the conjunction of these (powers) with a
greater or lesser (number of) differentiated aspects (bhedāṁśa) etc. takes

place by the power of His (creative) freedom. (108cd-109ab)

He says just that:”™

TGÑĪĪ JTTJĪṢJ fīTRRATISHdF: 11 Q01I
TGJf: TGTTT TdāēāīszkJfTā |
EṭGIAĪĒEFI-FÇ[HETJIKETHṆEYĪ

gRJTTGTTĒṀTTTṀĪ
T: fēērā. |

ekavīro yāmalo ʻtha triśaktiś caturātmakaḥ || 109 ||
pañcamūrtiḥ sadātmāyaṁ saptako 'ṣṭakabhūṣitaḥ |

navātmā daśadikchaktir ekādaśakalātmakaḥ || 110 ||
dvādaśāramahācakraṇāyako bhairavaḥ sthitaḥ |

Bhairava, the Lord of the Great Wheel of twelve spokes,” abides

(also as) the ‘Solitary Hero’ (ekavīra), the ‘Couple’ (yāmala), as possessing

”" The following passage extends from 109cd to 123ab (110 to 123). Perhaps all of it is

drawn from or inspired by the 7riśirobhairava. Moṣṭt likely 109cd to 115ab (110 to 115)

are so. Jayaratha’s citations establish that the passage drawn from the Triśirobhairava

certainly extends from 1/11 lcd to 1/114cd-115ab (115).

” Here Abhinava implies that the Wheel with twelve spokes is the primary one over
which Bhairava presides. As the male powerholder, he presides over each Wheel,

extending his domains in consonance with the configurations of His energies, embodied
in the female deities that constitute the increasingly proliferating assemblies.

Analogously, further ahead (in 3/253cd-255), Abhinava declares that all wheels of
energies emerge from that wheel. But there the deity in the centre is Parā. Thus, the

assemblies are entirely female. Abhinava cleverly justifies the switch by explaining that

Parā is Bhairava’s Self. His source is the Trikasāra (sāraśāstra), which he quotes

directly before the Trisirobhairava, that refers to its proliferaton in other
configurations. It is obvious to the more knowledgeable that Abhinava is alluding here
to the Twelve Kālīs, the core of his Krama system. There is evidence that the Trikasāra

integrated its Trika with Krama, to some degree at least (see Trikasāra entry in the
Appendix concerning the sources). However, no Krama influence can be observed in the

many citations from the 7riśirobhairava, what to say of the Twelve Kālīs. Without
needing to resort to the fusion of these two Trika sources, Abhinava would certainly
have cited instances directly from the 7riśirobhairava. For in that way, he would have

enlisted another major Trika Tantra as supporting the synthesis of Trika and Krama

promoted by his teacher Śambhunātha, that he also took to be central to the teachings of

his Anuttara (the ‘most excellent’) Trika.

TANTRĀLOKA

three powers, as four-fold,” with five iconic forms, as six-fold, as this
group of seven and adorned with the group of eight, as the Nine-fold One
(navātman), as possessing the powers of the ten directions, and as the eleven

energies.” (109cd-111ab) (110-111)

“The ‘Solitary Hero’ʼ is Mṛtyujit (Śiva, the Conqueror of Death,

Who is worshipped alone) in the initial visualization (dhyāna). The ‘couple’

These two verses and the following one are quoted in the MM p. 82. Read as there
bhairavaḥ

sthitaḥ for bhairavas tv iti.

” This line is quoted below in TĀv ad 33/1.

The MM reads saptāṣṭakavibhūṣitaḥ (this (Bhairava) is adorned with the seven and

the group of eight’) for saptako ʻṣṭakabhūṣitaḥ. The variant seems to me to be a better
reading, but as Jayaratha has accepted it, it has been left as it is.

MM p. 82 etad uktaṁ bhavati — pūrvaṁ tāvat pīthatayā deham abhyarcya tanmadhye

hṛdayavyomarūpe ṣvātmarūpamahāprakāśalakṣaṇaṁ parameśvaram anusandhāya, tam
abhitaḥ prasarantīrindriyaśaktīś ca vicintya, tadanu sarvāntaḥkaraṇasamaṣṭilakṣaṇe
svacitte
viśvavedyavilāsalakṣaṇam
arghyadravyam
āpūrya,
tac
ca
pārameśvaraparāmarśamayyā
mantraśaktyā
saṁskṛtya,
tenaiva
kulāmṛtena

nijāvaraṇadevatāparimaṇḍalito

‘yaṁ parameśvaraḥ pūjanīya iti | ayaṁ ca

saṁkocavikāsayogād ekāram ārabhyā-saṅkhyāraparyantam āgameṣv arcanīyatayā
āmnāyate | yad uktaṁ śrītantrāloke — (TĀ 1/109cd-112ab (110-112)) . . . erat
tātparyeṇaiva
srotaścatuṣṭayopapāditānāṁ
paddhatīnãṁ
pravṛttir
ity
etāvanmātraparyavasāyi pījārahasyam |
‘This is what has been taught: first of all, worship the body as the seat (pīrha)
(of the deities). Once that is done, contemplate the Supreme Lord, who is the Great

Light which is one’s own nature there, in the centre, which is the Sky of the Heart.

Then, having reflected on the energies of the senses that flow forth all around from that,
and filled one’s own mind, which is the aggregate of all the inner organs (of sense), with
the liquid offering (arghyadravya), which is the play of all objectivity, and purified it

with the power of Mantra, made of the reflective awareness of the Supreme Lord, one

should worship this Supreme Lord, who is surround by His own attendant deities, with

that same Kula nectar. It is this that is taught in the Āgamas as that which is to be

worshipped that, contracting and expanding, thus (develops,) beginning with the (circle
with) one spoke up to that with innumerable (spokes). As is said in the Tantrāloka:
(quotes 1/109cd-112ab (110-112)). What is meant here essentially is that this is the

manner (in which) the liturgies taught in the four currents (of scriptures) operate. Just
this alone is what the secret of worship amounts to.”

" Abhinava refers repeatedly to the multiplicity of configurations of divine forms, an
evident and major feature of all Tantric pantheons. He understands them to be the
proliferation of the energies of the one energy of consciousness. His scriptural authority

in this regard is the Triśirobhairava. Jayaratha tells us that the first chapter of the TBh
deals with the Wheel of a Thousand Spokes, formed through the progressive
development of the preceding smaller configurations that it thus integrates into itself.
Abhinava says that the subject is dealt with so extensively there that he cannot go into it
further for fear of making his book too long (3/254cd-257ab).

Similarly, Jayaratha states that the details are too many to reproduce (ad

1/111cd-112ab) (112)), and so refers the reader to the 7riśirobhairava directly. Even so,
Jayaratha (ad 1/109cd-110ab) (110-111)) does make an effort to list the names of the

deities in each assembly. As Jayaratha quotes the 7riśirobhairava extensively in several

places, there can be no doubt that he had access to it. Thus, one wonders why Jayaratha


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


(Śiva and Śakti are also worshipped) there. The three powers, Parā (Parāparā

and

Aparā)

(are

worshipped)

in

the

Kula

modality

(of

practice)

(kulaprakriyā).” The ‘four-fold’ consists of (he goddesses) Jayā (Vijayā, Ajitā

and Aparājitā).” (Bhairava possesses) ‘five iconic forms’ (when worshipped)
as Sadyojāta (Tatpuruṣa, Vāmadeva, Aghora and Īśāna) (that are the five forms

of Sadāśiva represented by His faces according to the Siddhānta). That is said

(in the following lines of scripture):

does not quote it here, preferring other sources instead, especially as he himself states

that, although the names of the deities of the assemblies are taught in various scriptures,

they are taught in particular in the first chapter of the Triśirobhairava (ad 1/11 cd112ab (112)). There is no reason to doubt, however, that the explanation he gives here is

drawn from the TBh, and so is reliable.

Read mṛtyujid iti for mṛtyujiti. Mṛtyujit, the Conqueror of Death, is still a very
popular form of Śiva all over India. The repetition of his Mantra and fire offerings are
considered to be very beneficial for those who are sick or mentally disturbed. The
Netratantra, the Tantra of the Eye, is His main Tantra, so-called because it teaches a
visualization of the Maṇḍala of Śiva’s Third Eye. Jayaratha is saying that as Mṛtyujit,

Śiva is worshipped alone, without His consort.

” The three Trika goddesses that are worshipped on the prongs of the Trident of the

Trika maṇḍala may also be worshipped in the corners of a triangle (that is, a three-

spoked cakra) representing the Goddess as the womb (yoni) of the creation which, when
recognised to be such, is Pure Knowledge, not Māyā. Thus, the Trika triad identified, as

Abhinava regularly does, with the subject, means and object of knowledge, is both the

Trident and triangle of the three energies. Accordingly, Abhinava writes (in PTy p. 5354):

‘The goddess (bhagavatī) Pure Knowledge (sśuddhavidyā) endowed with the
undivided (unity) of the subject, means and object of knowledge, is triangular (trikoṇā).
It is filled (on the plane of) Māyā with the excellent reflected image of duality (bheda)

(of the many diverse things). Thus, Māyā also, which is the source of the universe, is in

reality, just (Pure) Knowledge. (Māyā) is said to be the Great Secret Place (mahāguhyā)

because she is not known to be such in the aforestated manner, and because it consists
of three angles (of the triangle), which are the subject (object and means of knowledge,)

as the glorious power of (their) oneness (abheda) has been concealed. She herself (as
this Triangle) is in actual fact the Trident, which is the abode of worship according to
the Trika teachings. That is said (in the following verse): ‘She is the (female) Triangle,
the Great Knowledge, the triple one (trikā), the abode of all aesthetic sentiments (raṣa),
the plane of emission, and so She should be worshipped (as) Trika. Again: ‘A single
universal vision dawns present (equally) in the subject, object and means of knowledge.”
An example ofa Trika triangle is the centre of the Maṇḍala worshipped in the
preliminary stages of the Kaula ritual as taught below in Chapter Twenty-Nine, which is
dedicated to the Kula modality of practice. See 29/45cd-46ab and commentary.

” These are the goddesses who attend on Tumburu, the main form of Bhairava of the

Vāma Tantras (the Tantras of the Left — vāma). See Dyczkowski 1988: 36-38, 149-150.
According to Swami Lakshmanjoo, the four are the states of waking etc., and Jayaratha
is wrong. But this is probably not s0, as Jayaratha had access to the TBh and so could
furnish the explanation it itself most probably supplied.

See above, 1/18, comm. and notes.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The group of five is the essence in (the teaching of) the Siddhānta, the

group of four in the (Tantras of) the Left and Right, and the triad (trika) in the

Bhairava Tantra.”ʼ

‘Six-fold’ (means the six goddesses). As he will say:

‘Viśvā (‘She Who is Everythingʼ), the Īśā (the Governess) of that
(universe), Hāraudrī, Vīranetrī (the Leader of the Heroes), Ambikā (the Young

Mother), and Gaurvī (the Female Teacher) are the goddesses in the six-spoked

(Wheel).


It is said concerning ‘the group of seven’ that:


A

very

similar

verse

appears

in

the

Kumārikākhaṇḍa

(51/1)

of the

Manthānabhairavatantra of the Kubjikā school. There the second half of the first line
reads catuṣkaṁ vāmagocare (‘the group of four in the field of the (Tantras of the) Left’)
instead of catuṣkaṁ vāmadakṣiṇe (‘the group of four in the (Tantras of) the Left and
Right’). This variant reading, which I have accepted, makes more sense, as the Bhairava

Tantra belongs to the right current of scripture to which the Trika Tantras belong.

Accordingly, in the KuKh, the reading of the next line is dakṣiṇe trikam ity āhuḥ (‘the
three (trika), they say, (is the essence of the Tantras) of the Right’) instead of trikaṁ tu

bhairave tantre (‘and the triad (trika) in the Bhairava Tantra). The version of these

lines found in the KuKh are also found at the beginning of the Gurukramādhikārasūtra
in Chapter 22 of the Yogakhaṇḍa (1) (22/25cd-45ab) of the Manthānabhairava. The rest
of that sātra explains them quite differently as follows.

‘Brahminicide, the drinking of wine, theft, sex with the teacher°s consort, and
incitement or association with these sins (saiyogin) are said to be the five great sins

according to the Siddhānta. Brahminicide, the drinking of wine, theft, and sex with the
teacherʼs consort - these, excluding incitement or association with them, are the four

sins according to (the teachings of the Tantras of the) Left. The drinking of wine, theft,
and sex with the teacher’s consort — is said to be the triad (of sins in the Tantras of the)

Right.’” See Dyczkowski 2009: vol. 5 notes on text and translation, note 1 (p. 47).

If the conjectured reconstruction of the text is correct, it appears that the
redactor of the text of this Kubjikā Tantra drew this verse from another Tantra without
understanding its meaning, whereas Jayaratha presumably did, because it was explained

in the source from which he drew it. It is also possible, but less likely, that Jayaratha
ascribed this meaning to this verse. Either way, it is clear from the preceding context

that he understood it this way.

‘ Below, at TĀ 33/2abc, this passage is ascribed to the Siddhāvīratantra. There the

first line reads viśvā tadīśā hāraudrī vīranetry ambikā tathā | The six are also listed in
MV 2/59cd-60ab: vi”"'vā viśveśvarī caiva hāraudrī vīranayikā | ambā gurveti yoginyo
bījais tair eva ṣaṭ smṛtāḥ || On the basis of the readings in these two passages, read
tadīśā hāraudrī for tadīśakā raudrī. Were it not for the reading in the MV and its
confirmation in 33/2abc below, the reading in the printed text would appear to be the
better one. Read vīranetry ambikā for vīrakā tryambikā. These goddesses are
worshipped on the corners of a hexagon.
According to Swami Lakṣhmanjoo, these six goddesses protect the adept
(sādhaka) and are six ways he experiences spiritual energy in the course of his practice
(sādhana). He says that: 1) Viśvā is ‘universal energy. 2) Īśikā is transcendental energy.

3) Raudrī obstructs the the sādhaka. 4) Vīrakā gives the sādhaka courage. 5) Tryambikā
bestows supreme (para) and inferior (apara) reflective awareness (parāmarśa) on the
sādhaka. 6) Gurvī is the energy that commands him.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘The (seven) Mothers are Brāhmī, Māheśvarī, Kaumārī, Vaiṣṇavī,

By ‘the group of eight’ (is meant) Aghora and the rest. He Himself is
Navātman” (the Nine-fold One who,) present in the centre of that group of
eight, (governs them). ‘(He possesses) the powers of the ten directions’. As is

said, (they are):
‘“Umā, Durgā, Bhadrakālī, Svasti, Svāhā, Śubhaṅkarī, Śrī, Gaurī,

Lokadhātrī, and Vāgīśī, who is said to be the tenth.”

The ‘eleyen’ (energies) are said to be those of Khaṇḍacakṛra. Up to
here, Bhairava has assumed a lesser number (of powers,) and so (with respect to

! The Sanskrit reads:

bṛāhmī māheśvarī caiva kaumārī vaiṣṇavī tathā |
vārāhī ca tathendrāṇī cāmuṇḍā ceti mātaraḥ ||


Cf. TS which is practically the same:


brāhmī [kh: brahmāṁ;
g: ?] māheśvarī caiva kaumārī vaiṣṇavī tathā |I
vārāhī caindrikā [kh: cendrikā] devī cāmuṇḍā saptamī matā | TS 9/432cd-433ab
This is exactly the same group of seven Mothers found in the Svacchanda
Tanṇtra. They are described there in 10/1018cd-1025 as arranged in the eight directions,
with Umā added as an eighth. See below, in 33/2 following MV 3/14, eight Mothers are
listed, namely: Brāhmaṇī, Māheśī, Skāndī, Vaiṣṇavī, Aindrī, Yamātmikā, Cāmuṇḍā and

An early reference to the Mothers, predating the Tantras, is found in the
Durgāmāhātmya (11/13-21). There the Mothers are Brahmāṇī, Māheśvaṁī, Kaumārī,
Vaiṣṇavī, Varāhī, Nṛsiṁha, Aindrī, Śivadūtī and Cāmuṇḍā. There they are all identified
with Durgā (Nārāyaṇī) in a series of invocations of a series of forms of the goddess that
continues with Mahārātri, Sarasvatī, Durgā, Kātyāyanī, Bhadrakālī, Gaṇṭhā, and
Caṇḍikā (11/22-28).
According to Swami Lakshmanjoo, the seven Mothers ‘govern the sādhaka in
states of organic actionʼ.

‘ According to MV 1/19cd-21ab, the group of eight Aghoras (aghorāṣṭaka) are
Aghora, Paramaghora, Ghorarūpa, Ghoramukha, Bhīma, Bhīṣaṇa, Vamana, and Pibana.

They are the Bhairavas of the goddesses mentioned in the Vidyā of Parāparā, who have
the same names in the feminine. See below, 30/20-26ab. Concemning the Eight
Bhairavas, see note 8,1029; 11,184; 15, 385, 390; 29,127; and 30,50.
Navātman is the Bhairava of Aparā. According to MV 8/21cd-23ab, the mantra is
RHRKṢMLVYŪM. Each letter has a corresponding Bhairava with Navātmābhairava
(represented by M) in the centre. Concerning this important seed-syllable Mantra and its

variants and the iconic form of Navātmābhairava, see Dyczkowski 2009: intro. vo. 2,
pp. 423 ff.
Read ‘khaṇḍacakroktāḥ’ for ‘khaṇḍacakroktā’. Abhinavagupta refers to

Khaṇḍacakra, which literally means ‘the Broken or Incomplete Circleʼ, in the PTv, with
regards to which he quotes the Kubjikāmata. As this reference is not found in the printed
edition of the Kubjikāmata, it may have been drawn from an earlier version of the KM.
It is also possible that the word ‘mata’ here means just ‘teaching’ or ‘school’. If so, it

may have been drawn from another Kubjikā Tantra, although admittedly, there is no
other reference in Abhinava’s works that indicates he knew the Kubjikā Tantras. Even
so, they certainly did exist at that time outside Kashmir, if not in the Valley. The

TANTRĀLOKA

the following configuration of twelve, He) is the thirteenth.™ In this (way), (he)

refers to (and introduces) the (form of Bhairava which is associated with) a

greater number (of energies).

And so he says that the greater number (of energies) is endless:


reference declares that: ‘above Māyā is Mahāmāyā, which is the bliss of the Triangle’

(PTy p. 184). We may infer from the context that Abhinava implies that the Triangle is
Khaṇḍacakra. The identification of the Triangle with Mahāmāyā
is not common in the
Kubjikā sources, but it does occur, for example, in the following reference from the
Ambāṣaṁhitā (25/65c), where the Half Wheel (ardhacakra) is similarly identified with
Mahāmāyā, the higher ‘divine’ aspect of Māyā. There we read: ‘she is the goddess
Koṅkaṇā, the energy of nectar (madhu lit. ‘honey’) who oozes into the divine Half
Wheel of Māyā’ (devī sā koīṅkaṇā yā (vā) kṣarati madhukalā divyamāyārdhacakre). But

this may well not be meant here. It is hard to see how eleven units can be related to a

triangle, although one could describe it as ‘a fragment of a wheel’ or as half of one if we
take the complete wheel to be a hexagon (see below, note 3,319 to TĀv ad 3/94cd95ab). Another more likely possibility is a reference in the Chummāsaṁkeṭtaprakāśa
reported by Sanderson (2007: 348 n. 382). This is the teaching (kathā) of the Incomplete
Circle, stated as follows: ‘the Mahaugha (Great Flux) of the rays of Khaṇḍa [cakra]

comes about when after uniting within the cycle of consciousness in each flow [of

cognition] and relishing their respective fields of experience they revert and so eliminate
one . . . [of their number].” What the Kaulasūtra cryptically says with reference to this

teaching explains how the Incomplete Circle, originally in twelve parts (possibly
representing the twelve inner and outer senses) loses one and so becomes ‘broken':

‘When the twelve rays unite without force the confidence of their leader dissolves.
[This] one [among the twelve therefore] disappears. So there is a breaking of the circle
caused by a deficiency in [their] discipline.’ (Sanderson's translation, ibid. p. 348)

Jayaratha understands the form of Bhairava with less than twelve forms to be related
to the ‘lesser’ number of powers, that is, less than twelve. Bhairava, who sustains within
Himself and is Lord of the twelve, is the thirteenth, and so begins the series with the
greater number. It seems that Abhinava is quoting the lost Triśirobhairava as an

authority to establish that the ‘wheel of twelve spokesʼ, which for him is that of the
twelve Kālīṣ, integrated with the Trika goddesses is the main one (mukhyacakra).

However, although the TBh was an important Trika Tantra, none of the references

drawn from it indicate that it integrated Krama teachings into its Trika, unlike others,
notably the Devyāyāmala. Moreover, the primary sources do not refer to this circle of

twelve Kālīs as surrounding a Bhairava in the centre. This Wheel is an entirely female
one. The deity in the centre is a thirteenth Kalī (see below, note to introductory remarks

to verse 4/125).
Anyway, Abhinava's purpose is to emphasize the privileged status of the
twelve-spoked wheel. Thus, the Twelve Kālīs appear regularly as the unfolding
experience of the highest state, realised in all three categories of means to realisation.
They appear, as they do here, as the reason for Bhairava’s plenitude (3/251cd-252ab),
and as the source of all other configurations of energies (śakticakra), in Chapter Three,
which deals with the Supreme (Śāmbhava) Means (see 3/253cd ff.). Abhinava presents

them in detail in Chapter Four (4/122cd ff.), which deals with the Empowered Means as

that category of practice that is essentially concerned with the transformation of
differentiating thought back into its original pure conscious nature, which is the specific

function of the Twelve Kālīs. Accordingly, they appear in a practice that begins in the

Individual (Āṇava) Means linked to the intellect in Chapter Five (see 5/27cd-36). There

Abhinava calls them the Wheel of the Absolute (anuttaracakra) (5/27cd-28ab), which

thus represents in a unique way the plenitude (pūrṇatā) and perfection of Śiva

consciousness as the Goddess of Consciousness, who consumes all duality into herself.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Tj aāTāāēī f̄ī-̄aTSṀ āṬ 7J: 11] 222II

fṝīrarh mṁmī fāqīTchfārri|

evaṁ yāvat sahasrāre niḥsaṁkhyāre ‘pi vā prabhuḥ || 1 11 II
viśvacakre maheśāno viśvaśaktir vijrmbhate |

In this way, the Great Lord, (all) powerful.® who is (Himself) all
the powers, unfolds within (the one Wheel which is) all the Wheels
(viśvacakra), until (He expands) into the Wheel of a Thousand Spokes,” or
even within that of countless spokes.™ (111cd-112ab)
‘The Wheel of a Thousand Spokes’ is described in the first chapter of
the Triśirobhairavatantra. For fear of making the book excessively long, each
This verse is quoted in MM p. 82. There instead of the reading prabhuḥ (‘powerful’),

we find vibhuḥ (‘pervasive’), which seems better in this context.
Cf. below, 4/132ab and also 5/31cd-32ab and 5/37-38.

According to Swami Lakshmanjoo, all-transcendent Bhairava as the thirteenth

onwards is beginning to enter into the innumerable state of His being: ‘He is the Lord of

the twelve-fold Cakra, but He cannot be ‘numbered’ (kalanā) so He is not really the
thirteenth — He is not a number. He is Asaṁkhya (countless).”

This verse is quoted below in TĀv ad 33/1. The name ‘viśvacakra’ can also be

translated as ‘the wheel which is all the wheelsʼ, that is, all the infinite possible

configurations of energies. In the economy of Anuttara Trika, all the Wheels, that is,
configurations of energies of consciousness, derive from the Main Wheel
(mukhyacakra), which is the Wheel of the Twelve Kālīs described in Chapter Four

(4/122cd ff.). They unfold within the Void of the Sky of Consciousness. At one with
consciousness, the energies and their configurations are themselves as many Voids
within the one Great Void. As Abhinava explains:

‘It is never possible to enumerate the various kinds of Wheels, because (their)
common foundation are the spokes of the endless rays present in that Wheel (with
twelve spokes), just as the (variegated colours) white, yellow, red and so on of a
peacock’s feather manifest by its unfolding and folding back (appearing to be many
feathers), although it is not so. The Lord of the Wheel, Who is (full to) overflowing with
subtle consciousness (in which all things are) dissolved away into its unexpanded state,
manifests in the same wonderfully variegated way in the dynamic state (vṛti) of (its
constant) unfolding (as all things) and folding back (in on itself). By the folding back of
one or other (spoke of) that (Wheel) and the unfolding of some (other), it appears to be
transformed into (all the Wheels,) beginning with a Wheel with one spoke (up to one)
with a thousand spokes or even countless (spokes, each) inserted into and contained
within one another or not (at all) (cf. below 3/267ab-267cd (3/266-267ab)). (One may
ask:) what of that? (The point is that) That one wheel unfolds as the Void (vyoman)

itself.

Or else (one can say that just) that (Void), containing within itself endless
(numbers of) Wheels of Being, manifests. Or else (from another perspective), that the

one Great Void contains endless numbers of Voids. Just as the one sky shines white,
blue and red, and just as these clouds shine in many ways, similarly, the free principle of

consciousness shines with its own inconceivable number of forms, nor are they,
therefore, anything at all.. MVV 1/943-949

TANTRĀLOKA

word has not been corroborated (by quoting the whole passage). (The Wheel

of) ‘countless spokesʼ is (such) because the world-orders etc. are endless. Even

so, itis not separate from (Bhairava), and so he says that (the Lord is) ‘endowed
with all the powersʼ. That is said (in the Maṅñgalaśāstra):

‘Power and the possessor of power are said to be two categories. His
powers are the entire universe, while the Great Lord is the possessor of

Surely, if the Lord alone is the ultimate reality (paramārtha) of all these
Wheels, since the purpose is served by just that one, why are many described in
each scripture (sśāstra)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

īTHtr̥ ī TBPTIĪ AṬTĪRTHTGTHT ||[22I

teṣām api ca cakrāṇāṁ svavargānugamātmanā || 112 ||
aikyena cakrago bhedas tatra tatra nirāpitaḥ |
The

difference

between

those

configurations

(cakra)

also

is

described in various places (in the scriptures), (each) as an (encompassing)
unity, the nature of which accords with the category to which it belongs
(according to its function). (112cd-113ab)
‘” Abhinava retums repeatedly to refer to the multiplicity of configurations of divine

forms, which is an evident and a major feature of all Tantric pantheons. Most times he
refers back implicitly or explicitly to his statements here, and so to the authority of the
Triśirobhairavatantra. Jayaratha tells us here that the very first chapter of the TBh deals

with the Wheel of a Thousand spokes. He refers the reader to the same chapter for
details of numerous wheels again ad 3/254cd-257ab. Abhinava implies (1/11 1cd-112ab

(112)) the wheel of a thousand spokes was presented as the culmination of a progression
of successive more extensively populated configurations. Ultimately, they are all

contained in the most excellent of them, which is that of the Twelve Kālīs, to which the
TBh itself apparently did not refer. Certainly, if it did do, so Abhinava would have

quoted it as saying so. That way he would have enlisted another major Trika Tantra as

supporting the synthesis of Trika and Krama promoted by his teacher Śambhunātha, that
he also took to heart as central to the teachings of Anuttara (the ‘most excellent’) Trika.

This verse epitomizes a central point of doctrine. Accordingly, Jayaratha quotes it or
parts of it in as many as twelve other places, namely in TĀv ad 3/66ab-67cd (3/66cd67ab), 78ab-79cd (78cd-79ab), 99cd-100ab, 142cd-143ab (142), 191 (190cd-191ab),

205cd-206ab, 228, 5/40, 69ab (5/68cd), 8/174cd-175ab (174), 9/154ab, 13/264-265, and
29/81. Abhinavagupta himself quotes it (in 5/40) and tells us that Śrīkaṇṭha uttered it the

Maṅñgalaśāstra. Kṣemarāja quotes the full verse (ŚSūvi ad 3/8), third quarter (ŚSūvi ad
3/30) and half (NTu ad 21/20-32ab), saying it is from the Sarvamaṅgalā. Most of
Jayaratha’s references are in Chapter Three, which deals with the Divine Means
(Śāmbhavopāya). This is because this means is based on Śiva’s power of the will, which

is His freedom and the one power that manifests as all the others. Abhinava quotes the

second line in the PTV (p. 41). There, as here and other places in the Tantrāloka, this

reference is cited to indicate that all of the countless powers are forms of the one power

of the freedom (svātantrya) of Śiva consciousness.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

(Each Wheel) is an ‘(encompassing) unityʼ, because (its constituents)

belong to a common type that performs specific, fixed functions such as

creation (srṣṭi) and the like." ‘The nature’ (of this encompassing unity) is said
to ‘accord with the category to which it belongs’, because it performs (its

own specific) fixed function." Thus there is a ‘difference between Wheelsʼ,

and so the (number of) Wheels (described) in the scriptures are endless.

He illustrates that (with an example):


TṬN=TĒTĒTTrTTTĀTVTĀ
T 12231
TZTTVĀTĪ]
TTRĀĪTH fēB Rrījf; |

catuṣṣaḍdvirdvigaṇanāyogāt traiśirase mate || 1 13 ||
saṭcakreśvaratā nāthasyoktā ciṭrā nijākṛtiḥ |

The mastery of the six wheels of the Lord’s own form is said in the

Traiśirasamata to be wonderfully various by virtue of His union with

four, six and twice times twice those (powers). (113cd-114ab)

Twice four makes eight and again (doubling) in the same way, sixteen.

Twice six makes twelve, again (doubling) in the same way, twenty-four. This
is (the Lord’s) ‘masteryʼ of the six Wheels which is ‘various’, that is, of many

forms, because of the wonderful variety of limiting adjuncts associated with the

particular (contents) that pour forth (as each) Wheel. (t is) ‘(the Lord’s) own

formʼ because nothing else separate from that is (ever) perceived. Thuṣ, in the
Traiśirasamata, that is, the Triśirobhairava, (this mastery) ‘is said’ to be of the

! The word ‘cakra’ means most literally ‘wheel’, but by extension can also mean

‘configuration’, ‘assembly°, or ‘cycle’. In this context the word denotes a configuration
or cycle of energies (śaktisamūha). Thus, as his example, Jayaratha appears to be

referring here to the Wheels (i.e. cycle of energies) of creation, persistence, withdrawal
and the Inexplicable. The worship of the goddesses in these Wheels or cycles is a
standard feature of Krama (kālīkula, kālīkrama) ritual.

The Wheels (cakra) are all essentially the same, as they all configurations of the

energies of consciousness. However, they vary according to their functions.
" Read, as Jayaratha does, citrā nijākṛtiḥ for citranijākṛteḥ..
l Cf. below 5/90-92ab (89cd-91) and the commentary, where Jayaratha quotes this
verse, as well as TĀv ad 29/9, where half the verse is quoted. These configurations of
four, six, eight, twelve, sixteen and twenty-four energies develop out of Śiva’s single

transcendent unperturbed nature in the phase of descent. Then the ascent takes place
through ten phases of Emptiness (5/90-92ab). Cf below, 16/2¢d-4. In Chapter ThirtyThree (33/2-14ab), Abhinava, drawing from the Siddhavīra (SYM?) and (mostly) from
the MV, takes the trouble just once to list the names of the deities populating similar
configurations (cakra) enclosing the Trika goddess integrated with the phases of
emanation and withdrawal, as outlined above and taught by his Trika teacher
Śambhunātha (33/32). The sets do not coincide with the group of six wheels mentioned
here. He preferred, quite rightly, to draw from his most authoritative source. Thus,
unless the 7Triśirobhairava or a parallel source is recovered, it is not possible to fill out

the details of their content or even their application.

Thus, the six wheels are of 4, 6, 8, 12, 16, and 24 spokes.

TANTRĀLOKA

Lord, who is endowed with (absolute) freedom and presides over each Wheel.

That is said there:


‘O goddess, (each of) the groups of four, six and eight,• and (the

Wheels with) twelve, sixteen and twenty-four spokes, are (each) individually
well established.”
The many types of Wheels and reason (nimitta) for the difference
(between them) is also explained in the 7riśirobhairava itself. Thus, he says (in
the following verse):

īTīṁ sīēcēitīī ṁ- catatkza: || q2I

nāmāni cakradevīnāṁ tatra kr̥tyavibhedataḥ || 114 ||
saumyaraudrākṛtidhyānayogīnyanvarthakalpanāt |

"The names of the goddesses of the Wheels there (vary) according

to their various functions. (They do so also) because they are conceived in
accord with their purpose, (nature and the meaning of their name)
(anvarthakalpana), in association with the visualization (dhyāna) of (this or

that) peaceful (saumya) or fierce (raudra) form. (114cd-115ab)

t The fifth syllable of the first quarter of this verse is long (guru) instead of being short
(laghu), as it should be. Even so, the expression ‘ṣatkoṣṭakaṁ’ is not correct Sanskrit,

although the intended sense is clear. Moreover, the division of the two halves of the first
line is clumsy. dvādaśāraṁ ṣoḍaśārakam is hypermetrical by one syllable. This extra

initial syllable is accommodated into the previous quarter, which is short of one final
syllable.

I Verṣes 114cd-121ab (115-122) are a paraphrase of a passage from the first chapter of

the Triśirobhairavatantra.
t Cf. below, 3/255-256, 266ab (265). The assemblies (cakra) are constituted of real,
individually distinct deities, although they are all expressions of the one integral, pure

consciousness. Each Wheel has its own functions. These belong to two categories,
namely, šānta (tranquil), that is, saumya (benevolent), or ‘raudra’, ‘wrathfulʼ or

‘fierce’. They correspond to two types of optional rites (kāntya), performed to gain some
particular result. One is called sāntikā, which literally means ‘pacificatoryʼ, as are for
example exorcisms, or more generally the removal of evil, troubled beings from a

particular place. The other variety is called ‘āpyāyana’, which literally means

‘nourishment’. These include rites performed for prosperity and fulfilment (puṣṭi) and

the like. The other type of rites are called ‘raudra’, ‘fierce’ or ‘ghora’, ‘terrīfic’. These

include various forms of black magic (abhicāra), of which there are six standard
varieties (ṣaṭkarma). According to the most common listing, they are rites to 1) murder
one’s enemy (maraṇa), 2) delude (mohana), 3) paralyse (stambhana), 4) create enmity
between allies of the enemy (vidveṣaṇa), 5) expel (uccātana), and 6) bring others under
one’s control (vasīkaraṇa). These rites are termed ‘intentional’ (kāmtya). Abhinava does

not deal with them because, as he says, peoplesʼ desires are very many, as are these rites
(below, 26/11, cf. 28/1-5, concerning the different types of rites). These magical rites

are explained in detail in Goudriaan 1978: 251 ff.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

(The words) ‘is

said’ (uktā) should be added from the previous verse,

changing the gender etc. (in accord with the syntax here). (Although) the
Supreme Lord (parameśvara) is just one, He manifests in a (particular) fixed
form, the nature of which is peaceful or wrathful etc., according to the particular
desire of the adept (sādhaka) so that, having done so, he may bestow (upon
him) each particular accomplishment (siddhi) (pertaining to the visualization of

that form). That is

said (in the Triśirobhairava-tantra):

‘The Lord, like a wish fulfilling gem, always assumes the nature of the

particular form in which the adept recollects him.”

One should understand this point for oneself from the first chapter of
the venerable 7risirobhairava. For fear of making (this) book (to0) long, we

have not corroborated (this view) with every word (there). (Abhinavagupta)
says just that.

The Nourishing Power of the Creative Imagination (pratibhā)

In his commentary on the PT, Abhinava explains how the fluctuations of the

mind and feelings of hate, benevolence, and love involved in the magical rites to help
(which are ‘tranquilʼ) or damage others (which are fierce’) are aspects of

consciousness. He says that they are the instruments of the diverse play of its universal
manifestation which, as such, are hypostatised as deities. Thus, they are essentially
consciousness itself, which assumes in various circumstances, peaceful and fierce
forms. Accordingly, he writes:

‘As the fluctuations of the mind, such as anger and the like, are one with the
(aesthetic relish of) the wonder of consciousness, and also because they could not

otherwise assume their own specific nature, they are the divine instruments

(karaṇadevatā) of the Supreme Lord which, as the rays of the Śun of Śiva, each (in their
own way) unfold his (divine) play. Each combining (variously) with each other, they
assume innumerable forms, conceived to be peaceful or fierce in accord with the

particular (operation), terrific or peaceful, of (magical) rites such as expulsion

(uccāṭana), murder (maraṇa), pacification and so on. As such, in accord with these
various black and other magical operations (kṛtya), they are said in scriptures such as

the Mata and the like to be deities worthy of worship, and the attendants of the
venerable Lord Bhairava.’ PTv p. 42.
The word ‘uktā’ — ‘is said is a participle which in the previous verse agrees with the
feminine abstract noun ‘īśvaratā, i.e. ‘mastery’, to which it refers. Here it refers to ‘the

namesʼ — nāmāni — which is a neuter plural noun, and so should be made to agree

accordingly, i.e. uktāni nāmāni — ‘the names said to be (of the goddesses).

]preṣume that Jayaratha is quoting from the Triśirobhairavatantra in view of what
he goes on to say.

Cf. ‘Like the wish fulfiling gem, the omniform God approaches (His devotee)

assuming the nature in which He is worshipped.' Ādhārakārikā 66, quoted in the

Spandapradīpikā (Dyczkowski 1992: 141).

Jayaratha thuṣ confirms it is Abhinava himself who is speaking here. Viewing the

large number of configurations of divine forms (cakra) described in the first chapter of
the Triśirobhairavatantra, Abhinava gives his explanation as to why they are so many

and diverse. Jayaratha quotes just a line from his source, which is sufficient to sanction

his view. Deity appears in accord with our needs and understanding. Deity in its

countless divine forms is such because of us, no less than we are as we are because
Deity has assumed our form.

TANTRĀLOKA

rī ḍferārr āīrā JJaī ā] || 22uI
ekasya saṁviṉṇnāthasya hy āntarī pratibhā tanuḥ || 1 15 I|

saumyaṁ vānyan mitaṁ saṁvidūrmicakram upāsyate |

The body of the one Lord of Consciousness is (His) inner creative

imagination (pratibhā). (It is) worshipped (externally) as the cycle of the
waves of the (outpowering of the powers of) consciousness

(saṁvidūrmicakra) (in a conditioned) limited (form as the deity made
manifest thereby), whether peaceful or otherwise. (115cd-116ab)

‘The inner creative imagination’ (āntarī pratibhā) is the power of
freedom (svātantryaśakti). By ‘otherwise’ is meant wrathful (raudra). Thus,
because it is distinguished by each particular, peaceful or wrathful form (of the
deities in it), it is ‘limited’.

Having analysed that (point), he illustrates (it with examples):


aā aaṁrcqftēfīzṝ afērzat aīĩzaīq 1| 22ē11

STTHTĪcTTHAT, PTTTRTIĪJ aTaT: |

TETTI
TTTT IT̄d TR TTGTĒJŠGT |I 22.9|I

STṬIN TĪI JTH TCHIĪ JTT-TT |IṞ82¢CII

GĀĪĪTRTGTJTTTTA ĪTJGT: #T: TE II/[2R/II

After this concluding explanatory verse of his own, Abhinava goes on with an
insertion that continues up to 135ab and then returns to this reference from to the TBh
again in 135cd-136ab.
Swami Lakṣhmanjoo explains that ‘the Wheel of the Tide of Energies — irmicakra is

pratibhā, which means conscious creative energy.’ The term ‘Wave’ to denote the

activity and nature of consciousness is drawn from Krama sources. It seems that this is a

name for the primary cycle of consciousness. Its phases constitute the activity of
consciousness as aspects of the one Goddess of Consciousness (saṁviddevṝ). This Wave
of creative imagination that arises inwardly within consciousness generates

configurations — ‘wheels’ — of divine forms along with their associated Mantras and the
consonant outer ritual action.

Cf. below, 3/65ab-65cd (3/65cd-66ab).

Presumably, the Wheel of the Waves of Consciousness is worshipped in a limited

way as the Wheels produced by its waves. They are of two types, according to whether

they are configurations — ‘wheels' — of peaceful or wrathful deities. Jayaratha’s view is

that it is the same configuration of divine forms that varies. Either way, these Wheels
are ‘limited’, whereas the Wheel of the Waves of Consciousness itself is not. Perhaps

we may identify it with Viśvacakra, mentioned above in 1/112.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


sṝṁīē attdōīaq 11 22zI

asya syāt puṣṭir ity eṣā saṁviddevī tathoditāt || 116 ||
dhyānāt sañjalpasaṁmiśrād vyāpārāc cāpi bāhyataḥ |
sphuṭībhūtā satī bhāti tasya tādṛkphalapradā || 117 ||
puṣṭiḥ śuṣkasya sarasībhāvo jalam ataḥ sitam |

anugamya tato dhyānaṁ tat pradhānaṁ pratanyate || 1 18 II

ye ca svabhāvato varṇā rasaniḥṣyandino yathā |
dantyauṣṭhyadantyaprāyās te kaiścid varṇaiḥ kṛtāḥ saha || 119 ||
taṁ bĩjabhãvam ãgatya saṁvidaṁ sphuṭayanti tãm |
puṣṭiṁ kuru rasenainam āpyāyayatarām iti || 120 ||
sañjalpo ʻpi vikalpātmā kiṁ tām eva na pūrayet |
amṛteyam idaṁ kṣīram idaṁ sarpir balāvaham || 121 ||
tenāsya bījaṁ puṣṇīyām ity enāṁ pūrayet kriyām ḷ

(When) the Goddess of Consciousness is clearly evident (in the

form of the intention): ‘may he be fulfilled (puṣṭi)”’ she manifests by virtue
Abhinava goes on to say that Deity may be worshipped in a limited or unlimited form,

according to whether one wishes to attain some worldly benefit (bhoga) or liberation
(mokṣa), respectively (1/123ab (1/123)). The ‘limited form’ of Deity is the visualized
one. The Tantras of all schools contain thousands of descriptions of visualized forms of

deities. The usual common forms of worship (pūjā) require the imagining of the form of
the deity, even if it is represented externally in an icon, although it is more commonly
invoked into a Yantra or a jar. In this respect, Abhinava’s Anuttara Trika is very
unusual. Of all the many deities mentioned in the Tantrāloka, Abhinava describes the
forms of only three. As one would expect, these are those of the triad of goddesses,
Parā, Parāparā and Aparā. But even then, he presents a general overview of the variant
forms mentioned in the scriptures without precisely indicating the ones he prefers (see
below, 15/323cd-28ab and 31/39-41ab, where their colours are mentioned). He takes

care to say immediately after (in 15/328cd-330ab) that they are essentially omniform,

pure consciousness, and as such help to achieve liberation. We may note, by the way,

that this attitude is attenuated with respect to the Mantras of these and related deities.
Abhinava clearly presents the sonic body of the deity with its ‘limbs’ and ‘facesʼ in the
context of riṭual. See Chapter 30.
Worldly benefits (bhhoga) are a common aim, and are well accepted to be such

generally in all traditions engaged in ritual and Mantra practice. Abhinava freely accepts
that this is a parallel concern to the attainment of liberation; even so, his focus is quite
clearly on the latter, seeing the former as a steppingstone to its attainment. Thus, it is not

surprising that Abhinava chooses to comment at length on the Parātrīśikā, which denies

the utility of outer ritual, and is concerned with what Abhinava calls the Anuttara
modality (prakriyā) of practice, which is entirely within consciousness and so its sole
purpose is liberation, and that too, in this life (jīvanmukti). The deity in that case is

‘without form’ as the Light of Anuttara, full of the energies of Speech that, reflecting

into one another, generate in and through the flux of its perpetual emission (visarga) all

the levels and spheres of existence and the infinite cycles of time. Here Abhinava

TANTRĀLOKA

of this meditation (dhyāna), that arises in this way in association with the
utterances (of Mantras) and outer (ritual) action (yyāpāra) and bestows on

that (man who invokes her) such kinds of fruits (as are in accord with her
peaceful or wrathful form).
1) (The visualization:) ‘fulfilment’ (puṣṭi) is a process of infusing the
‘juice’ (rasa) (of vitality) into one who has ‘dried upʼ (śuṣka). Thus, the
appropriate form of visualization is like (pure) clean (sita) water, and
unfolds with that as its principal (element).
2) (The Mantra:) Those letters from which, by their (very) nature,
(this) juice (rasa) flows as, for example, the labio-dental (V) and dental

(S), once combined with some (other) letters, assume the state of seed-

intends to illustrate how even rites performed solely for worldly benefits are necessarily
based on the same essentially free and liberating activity of consciousness, which is
operant and can be recognized to be manifest and actualized in ritual action. On the

manifest plane of relative distinctions, the opposites in this case are the two basic
categories to which divine forms belong - peaceful and wrathful.
In the passage that follows, Abhinava exemplifies how this takes place in a rite
for prosperity, wellbeing, nourishment and fulfilment (pusṭi), which is clearly meant for

the attainment of these worldly benefits. The point is that even in such cases, ritual is
effective because of the activity, power and divinity of consciousness, namely, the
Goddess of Consciousness. She is the creative imagination (pratibhā) of Lord Śiva Who
thus assumes various forms, peaceful or wrathful, according to the rite. This

consciousness becomes evident and actual when combined with the relevant meditation,
interior discourse and outer rites, which are three aspects in which this creative
īmagination manifests and operates in the domain of spiritual practice. It asserts itself
and fulfils its purpose in and through the intention (sartkalpa) which initiates the rite,

and threads through it in its phases as its primary mover and forms itself into it. Thus,
the Goddess of Consciousness manifests in the three ways indicated by the paragraph

numbering in the text of the Tantrāloka and its commentary as 1) the visualization, 2)
utterance of Mantra and 3) the rite.

Swami Lakshmanjoo explains: ‘It is internal consciousness — Samvid Devī — that

protects the sādhaka, [not just good wishes]. [The reading] ‘tathā’ is wrong[;] put tayā
instead [so that it means] ‘by that Samvid Devī’ [Goddess of Consciousness]. The
Dhyāna [visualization] here arises by Samvid Devī. [Goddess of Consciousness]. The
dhyāna [visualized form] is internal.”

Adopting the reading tayoditāt for tathoditāt, as suggested by Swami

Lakshmanjoo, the text would mean ‘she manifests by virtue of this meditation (dhyāna)

to which she gives rise (tayoditāt)’. Maintaining the form in the printed edition, the

Goddess of Consciousness ‘arises in this way’ would mean as either wrathful or
peaceful. In this example, she is, clearly, ‘peaceful’ and nourishing. The emendation
stresses the point, implied anyway, that it is the Goddess who generates the meditation

and visualized form.

The letters S and V form the first syllable of the Mantra SVĀHĀ, which is uttered

when offering an oblation to the fire. See below, 15/4, 15/439-443 (15/436cd-441ab)
and 17/24cd-25ab. The letter S, which is the first letter of the Vidyā of Parā (SAUḤ),

the Seed of the Heart (see below, 30/24cd-25ab), is also called the Seed of Nectar
(amṛtabīja), see below, 3/166ab-168ab (3/165cd-167). Clearly, the rites in this case are

internal.

There are countless examples in Tantras of all traditions of how Mantras
function in various ways to bring about specific results. For example, nine such

operations are listed in the Netratantra (18/6cd-8). These are: 1) ‘energizing’ (dīpana),


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


syllable (Mantras), and (s0) make that (form of) consciousness manifest.
Why then cannot an utterance (saṁjalpa) also, (although) essentially a

thought construct, impart (a sense of) fulfillment to that same
(consciousness) when (we say): “Bring about fulfiIment! Nourish him with
juice (rasa)”
3) (The rite:) (Thus,) this rite (which nourishes) should be
completed (by saying while offering oblations): “this nectar (amṛta), this
milk, this clarified butter is a source of strength. May I nourish his seed

with this!” (116cd-122ab) (117-122)

He describes the visualization and the rest (dhyāṇādi) in due order (in
this passage beginning with) ‘fulfilment (puṣṭi).
1) ‘Thus’, for the aforementioned reason, (it is water) because the

characteristic of ‘fulfilment (puṣṭi) ‘is a process of infusing the ‘juice’

(rasa) (of vitality) into one who has ‘dried up”ʼ. Water nourishes and it is

‘with that principal element’ that it brings about ‘fulfilment’, which is full

(and complete) etc.

2) Now he explains that ‘utterance (saṁyjalpa) is also of two kinds,

according to whether it is worldly (common every day utterance) (laukika) or

other-worldly (alaukika) (utterance of Mantras made in the course of ritual

with the praṇava OMṀ. 2) ‘Awakening (bodhana), with the mantra NAMAḤ. 3)
‘Striking (tāḍana), with the mantra PHAT. 4) “Aspersion’ (abhiṣecana), with the

mantra VAUṢAT. 5) “Purification’ (vimalīkaraṇa), with the mantra SVĀHĀ. 6)

‘Placement of the fuel’ (indhananiveśana), which serves to burn fetters and remedy
poison and the like. This is done by placing the mantra HUM at the beginning or end of
a mantra. 7) Libation (tarpaṇa), which gives strength (balavattādhāna), by placing the
syllable LAM at the beginning or end of each syllable of a mantra. 8) ‘Protection’
(guptibhāva), reciting the mantra or the name 100,000 times preceded and followed by
the mantra of the Eye (see below, 30/40cd-41ab). 9) ‘Nourishment’ (āpyāyana), which
strengthens further one who is already getting stronger by placing at the beginning and

end of each syllable of the Mantra or the name of the deity, the syllable VĀṀ.
Read -bhāvāpādana- for -bhāvāpādāna-

“! The primary meaning of the adjective ‘śuṣka’ is ‘dried upʼ. One could say that of a

dead, dried-up tree or piece of wood, and by extension, ofa person who is very weak, ill
or depressed. This ‘dryness’ is understood to be an absence of rasa. ‘Rasa’ means, most
literally, ‘juice’, as for example that of a fruit, the sugarcane, or the sap of a tree.
Accordingly, it also means both ‘taste’ or “flavour’ and ‘vital essence’. As such, this is

the name given to a constituent fluid or juice of the body, especially chyle, which
according to Ayurveda is formed from food and changed by the bile in the digestive

tract into blood. When food is digested it produces rasa, which nourishes the vital

constituents of the body (dhātu). In the same perspective, the same word also denotes

semen or living seed in general. The Upaniṣads mean to say that the Brahman is the
vital essence of all things, when they declare that He is rasa (raso vai ṣaḥ — Tait īya

Upanisad 2/7/1). Vitalizing and transformative, the alchemical elixir that serves as a
medicine for all diseases and transforms metals to gold is also called rasa. The
viṣualization, Mantra and rite invokes rasa to purify, nourish, cure from illness and
extend life. AIl this is implied in the term pusri, here translated as ‘fulfilment’, which is
the wellbeing and strength which, like pure water, nourishes and gives life to what is

‘dried out'.

TANTRĀLOKA

performance or the practice of Yoga). (He says that in this passage) beginning
with ‘those’ letters ‘for example, the labio-dental (V) and dental (S)”

‘(make) that (form of) consciousness (manifest)ʼ, that is, (the form of

consciousness which is a sense of) fulfilment (pusṣṭi.. ‘The state of seed

syllable (Mantras) is the state of Mantras. Thus the utterance of this (seed-

syllable) is other-worldly (not just common everyday speech). By ‘labio-

dental’ the letters V and the rest are (meant). By ‘dental’ (is meant) the Seed of


Nectar (S) etc. ‘Some (other) lettersʼ are those that are, for example, not labiodental. So it is said:


‘(The syllable) vaṣaṭ is enjoined for nourishment . . .” Also: “By means
of the classes of letters used for fulfilment and nourishment . . .’
In this way, cerebral and other (classes of letters) are also included. (The
statement that the utterance of Mantra is) ‘essentially a thought construct’
refers to its worldly (aspect). ‘That’ (form of) consciousness is fulfilment.

3) He now analyses external (ritual) action such as the offering of
oblation and the like (saying) ‘nectar° etc.
means thick sour milk
(dadhi). (Thus, with reference to that,) it is said:

attained) by offering oblations of thick sour milk . . .

‘supreme fulfilment (is

The words ‘source of strength’ are associated with each one (of the

sacrificial substances). “(May I nourish his) seed’, that is, all the vital
constituents of the body (dhātu), the semen, menstrual blood and the rest that

are the cause of the body, ‘with this’ sacrificial substance, such as molasses.®

“This’ — rite of fulfilment.
Referring to another reality which is to be known, he concludes this
(point).
Pāṇini in his grammar distinguishes between two types of Sanskrit: ‘worldly”

(laukika) and ‘other-worldly (alaukika). The former is classical Sanskrit, which may

well have been a language commonly spoken in his day where he lived by at least a
learned elite, and the latter Vedic Sanskrit, which was certainly no longer a common
spoken language anywhere in Pāṇini’s day. However, in this context, the distinction
intended is between common everyday language and that of Mantras. Swami
Lakshmanjoo intends the sense here quite differently. According to him: “saṁjalpa
[utterance] is external action [that is, uttering] pleasing, not harsh words.”

The letters that are combined as prescribed by the scriptures to form Mantras are no
longer just letters. Their state has changed to that of Mantras. The combination of letters
to form single syllables like kirī or śrīṁ are called ‘bījas’, that is, ‘seeds’, because they

are considered to be the seeds from which full Mantras develop. But although the two
are distinguished, the state or nature of both ‘seed’ and Mantra is essentially the same.

Read with MSs K, J, h, Ṅ, T and Ḍ vibhajayati for vibhajati.

Swami Lakshmanjoo: “Aṃṛta [nectar] refers to [the herb called] sakhaghu. You can
also use a samāgri [mixture] of rice, fruit and sakhaguti (?).”

AII the substances, including nectar and curd, are a source of strength, not just the
clarified butter.

The meaning of the word gaḍūcya is uncertain. The text is probably corrupt. The

printed text reads gadiūcyādinā, MS ]h reads gudacyādinā and the remaining MSs
guḍūcyādinā. 1 propose a tentative, rather unsatisfactory, emendation to guḍādinā.
Swami Lakshmanjoo suggests sakhaghu (above note 835).


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Limited and Unlimited Deities are Forms of the Lord of Consciousness

Tīaāṝr̥̄Ã lrũai: ag7aid || q2I|

tasmād viśveśvaro bodhabhairavaḥ samupāsyate || 122 ||

avacchedānavacchidbhyāṁ bhogamokṣārthibhir janaiḥ |

Therefore, the Lord of the universe (viśveśvara), the Bhairava Who
is Consciousness (bodhabhairava), is worshipped by those who desire
worldly benefits (bhoga) or liberation, with a (specific) limited (form) or
without limitation, (respectively). (122cd-123ab)
‘(Bhairava is worshipped) with a (specific) limited (form) or

without limitation’. According to the teaching (nīti) stated previously. a

‘limited (form) is the condition (of a rite) in which it is governed by a fixed

procedure such as a visualization (dhyāna) and the like. What is otherwise is

‘without limitation’. As he will say:

‘In the case of adepts (sādhaka) and those who desire worldly benefits,

the (specific ritual) procedure (they should follow) (vidhi) is (rigorously) fixed
by the constraint (niyati) (which determines that a particular action gives rise to

a specific result).™N (Whereas) in the case of those who know reality and those
who aspire for liberation, it is free of (any) restriction."N
Again, although the Lord has a limited form (in this sense), it is
vitalized by the unlimited, supreme form. One cannot achieve anything without

entering into that (unlimited) nature.

He supports this (view) by referring to the sense (of a passage in the)
Bhagavadgītā (without quoting it literally).

3ṢTRCTTIHT
ṢTTĪ TṬTĪRTḤ |I 233I
ye ‘py anyadevatābhaktā ity ato gurur ādiśat || 123 ||

!ṬThe teacher (Kṛṣṇa) has taught this (in a verse of the

Bhagavadgītā) that begins with (the words): ‘those also who are devotees of
other deitiesʼ. (123cd) (124ab)
(The verse) ‘that begins with’ — the set of statements beginning in this

way from here onwards. ‘The teacherʼ is the Lord Vāsudeva, who is the teacher
of what is true (tāttvikārtha). There (in the Bhagavadgītā, He says):
See above, 1/115ab-115cd (1/1 15cd-1 16ab).

“ Thus, for them the rite varies according to the results they aspire to attain.

“ Below, 26/55cd-56ab. The same verse is quoted again in the TĀv ad 4/199.

Verses 124-132 are a commentary on Bhagavadgītā 9/24-26.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The votaries of the three Vedas who drink soma and have been purified

of sin, having worshipped Me with sacrifices, pray for the way (to go) to

heaven. Having attained the holy world of the lord of the gods, they enjoy
(there) in heaven the divine pleasures (bhoga) of the gods.”
(again).

‘When (their) merit is exhausted, they enter the world of mortals

This is (what happens to) those who desire (worldly) enjoyments.

‘To those people who worship Me (alone), thinking of none other,
constantly engaged (in that), I bestow Yoga and forbearance.”
This is what happens to those who desire liberation. Having described
(the Lord’s) nature with limitation and without, one after the other, in order to
explain that the unlimited form is (present) in the limited (form) also, he
teaches:
-O Kaunteya, those also who are devotees of other deities and, having
faith (in them), worship (them), are (really) worshipping Me alone, (but)
without prior injunction (avidhipūrvaka).
“ BhGī 9/21.

# BhGī 9/22b.


Ibid. 9/23. Abhinava comments on verses 9/21-23 of the Gīā as follows:


‘Although they sacrifice to Me, desiring only small results, such as heaven,

etc., they themselves put limitations on what they could achieve because of the
weakness of their mind. That is why the merit (dharma) gained by performing sacrifices

with limited desires is instrumental in bringing those people back to earth again and
again. They continuously come and go from this world. However, it should not be
wrongly assumed that the nature of sacrifice (yāga) is the cause the cycles of birth and
death. This would be wrong. Therefore (Kṛṣṇa goes on to say that: ‘ give Yoga and

forbearance etc.).

How do others (who do not have limited results in their minds) think about the
Lord? They, only desiring the highest reality, attain the results in the form of the highest
reality. In this context, the word ‘yoga’ means attainment of the nature of the Brahman,
which did not exist before. While the word kṣema [forbearance’] means the protection
of that attainment. This protection is a guarantee that one is established in the Brahman

and there is no possibility of falling down from that state.’ Translation by Boris
Marjanovic (2002: 217-218).

“ BhGī 9/24. The following two verses (i.e. 24 and 25), quoted by Jayaratha further

ahead, complete the sense and so are best read together with this one:
‘I am the enjoyer and Lord of all the sacrifices, but they do not know Me in
reality (as I truly am), and so they fall. Those who are devoted to the gods go to the

gods. Those who are devoted to the ancestors go to the ancestors. Those who worship
ghosts go to the ghosts, and those who worship Me go to Me.’

The immediate sense of avidhipūrvaka is ‘not according to the proper procedureʼ.
Although this is the obvious meaning, Abhinava prefers to understand this expression as
translated. Indeed, he severely criticizes those who understand it the other way, because
if Kṛṣṇa is ‘the enjoyer of all the sacrifices’, He would accept impurity by accepting
impure sacrifices offered without following the proper procedure. But he ’agrees that


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


He explains that:


ye bodhād vyatiriktaṁ hi kīñcid yājyatayā viduḥ |
te ‘pi vedyaṁ viviñcānā bodhābhedena manvate || 124 ||

Kṛṣṇa teaches that ultimately the Supreme Being is the object of everybody's worship.

Thus, he goes on to say:


“‘My teacher explains this particular point in the following way: Even those

kinds of people — who under the influence of a dualistic philosophy worship other gods

and treat them as different from their own Self and as different from the nature of the

Brahman — worship only the highest Brahman, who is identical with their own Self.

However, these kinds of people observe faulty injunctions (dusṭavidhi), because their

worship includes within itself the notion of duality. Therefore, the Lord said, “they do

not know Me who is their own Self, who is the real enjoyer of sacrifices and has taken
the form of that particular god (that they worship). Therefore, such people deviate from

my path.” In this context, the word ‘deviate’ means that they go to other gods because
they are devoted to them. Those who, on the other hand, know the Lord as (the one)
undivided reality worship only him even when they sacrifice to other gods or to their

ancestors. Thus, we can conclude that all those who worship the highest Brahman, attain
that Brahman.’ Translation by Boris Marjanovic (2002: 220-221).
Abhinava points out that the Self is the ultimate object of sacrifice, even

though it is not named directly as a recipient, as are other deities to whom sacrifice is
offered, in accord with the definition of the sacrifice as ‘an offering of things to a deity

whose (name)is mentioned’ (Śabarabhāṣya 9/42/32). In actual fact, he says, the Selfis

implicitly always mentioned. The only difference between this ‘naming’ of the Self and
that of other deities is that it is not accompanied by injunctions. The discussion
continues:
‘But — someone may say — in order for the sacrificial substance to be offered,
the (name of) the deity should be mentioned. So in what way do you mean that the Self
is the object of sacrifice, when there is no mention (of the Self)? The injunction: ‘the
sacrificial rice Prāyaṇīya should be offered to Aditi’ (Taittarīyasaṁhitā 6/1/5/1) is
characterized by the mention of the deity. This reference is included in the injunction.

However, the Self is not the object of any injunction. This is why the Blessed One says

(that it is) ‘not preceded by injunction.’ The various deities, different and separate from
the Self, are, on the contrary, necessarily the object of injunction, because (the

injunction) serves to grasp what has not already been grasped. Our own Self, the

Supreme Lord, cannot be an object of a previous injunction, because he cannot be made
graspable by an injunction. [Moreover, what you say is not entirely correct, namely, that
the Self is never mentioned in the course of a sacrifice]. Without mentioning the Self,

nothing can take place. The truth then is this, that present in all the deities that are

mentioned, Indra and the rest, who are made present and effective by an injunction,
implicit within them and constantly mentioned is our own Self, which by its very nature
manifests all things and shines permanently as the continuous and recurrent idea and
sentiment of the ‘T’, which sustains the light of all of them, like a thread that keeps a
garland together. Thus, what is said in the verse, that is, (they are) ‘worshipping Me
alone (but) without prior injunction (avidhipūrvaka).’ Translation based on Gnoli’s

emendations and translation.

TANTRĀLOKA

Even amongst those who consider that there is something worthy of
worship that is separate from consciousness, (the ones) who carefully
examine the object (of their devotion), also agree that it does not (in fact)
differ from consciousness. (124) (124cd-125ab)

‘Those worshippers (yājaka) ‘who consider”, that is, know another
deity such as Indra, who has a specific (particular) fixed form ‘that is separate

from consciousnessʼ, that is, from their own Self, whose sole nature is the

perceiving subject (veditṛ), and (who) reflect very deeply on (that) deity, in the
form of Indra or the like, with most excellent faith, even though it is an object,
because it has a limited, fixed form, realize it to be at one with consciousness as
it is their own Self, which is one with the supreme perceiver. This is in accord
with the view (expressed in this verse from the Saṁṅvitprākaśa):
‘(In the course of perception) the object (becomes subjective and s0)

assumes the state of the subject, and the subject (becomes) consciousness. If it is
true that consciousness is Your essential nature (ārman), then (for that reason)

this universe is made of You.”

SP 1/31. The verse reads in the commentary:

vedyo vedakatām āpto vedakaḥ saṅṁvidātmatām |

saṁvit tvadātmā cet satyaṁ tad idaṁ tvanmayaṁ jagat ||
The same verse is also quoted below ad 10/267. There the verse reads
vedyaṁ vedakatāmāptaṁ vedakaḥ saṁvidātmatām |
saṁvit tvadātmã cet satyaṁ tenedaṁ tvanmayaṁ jagat |l
This and the preceding verse of the Samvitprakāśa is quoted in SpPra ad SpKā

28-29. In the recovered MSs of the SP, the two lines of this verse are reversed.
Moreover, there as well as in the citation here, we find the regular masculine reading

vedyo vedakatāmāpto, whereas in the citation of the verse ad 10/267 we find the neuter
vedyaṁ vedakatām āptaṁ, which is clearly erroneous. Also, there for tad idaṁ the
reading is tenedaṁ for that (reason) this .. which makes good sense but is not attested
elsewhere. However, in the case of the reading (satyarṁ) tad, the first half of the second
line spills over clumsily into the second. Moreover, adding practically nothing to the

meaning, it is redundant. Thus, although the reading tena is attested in only one case. I

have chosen to retain it.
The preceding verse, not quoted here, aids in understanding the meaning of this

one:

yadaiva viditaṁ viśvaṁ tadānīm eva cinmayam |
Yyan nāsti bhāgo vedyo ‘sau nātha yo vedakād bahiḥ |
‘O Lord, the moment (we realize the true nature of) the universe, (we realise)

pure consciousness, because there is no part of it that can be known objectively outside
the perceiver.’ SP 1/30.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Surely, (the Mīmāṁsaka may ask,) it is said that ‘the sacrifice is the

offering (of the sacrificial) substances (dravyatyāga) for the deity°. And (so)

in order that (that) poṣsession may be abandoned, (a specific) deity is

mentioned. But in the case of one’s own Self, the sole nature of which is

consciousness, there is no such designation in this way, so how can that be an

object of worship (and be a recipient of that offering)? With this doubt in mind,

he says:

Injunctions do not Apply to the Supreme Deity Who is the Ultimate Goal

zayarza ] faf: gearaṁzaz
a qaT: 11 23vII

tenāvicchinnatāmarśarūpāhantāprathātmanaḥ |
svayaṁprathasya na vidhiḥ sr̥ṣṭyātmāsya ca pūrvagaḥ || 125 l|
vedyā hi devatāsṛṣṭiḥ śakter hetoḥ samutthitā |
ahaṁrūpā tu saṁvittir nityā svaprathanātmikā || 126 ||
Thus, injunction (vidhi),, which is essentially a creation

(of

consciousness), does not precede (pūrvaga) (and condition the one

supreme Deity), the nature of which is the unfolding experience (prathā) of

subjectivity (ahantā), that is uninterrupted reflective awareness and is

(thus) self-revealing (svayaṁpratha)." The emanation of (limited) deities,

arisen from the power (of consciousness), which is (its) cause, is objective

Also cited below ad 15/158cd-159. The same definition of ‘sacrifice —
devatoddeśena dravyatyāgo yāgaḥ — is found in the commentary (vilocana) by


Nigamajñāna on the Varuṇapaddhati. He explains that:


‘iti vacanāt analakarmā (> -karma) kuṇḍasaṁskārāgnisaṁskārādikam |
ādiśabdena maṇḍapamaṇḍalārccanādī (> -di) |’
‘By saying this is meant the act of (offering to) the fire (and what it entails),
namely, the purification of the sacrificial hearth and the fire etc. By the word ‘etc.’ (is
meant) the worship etc. of the pavilion and the maṇḍala.” Varuṇpaddhativyākhyā IFP T
1034 no p. 835
The technical sense of the word dravya- is ‘sacrificial substance’. In common

usage the word means, amongst other things, ‘wealth’. Thus, the expression
‘dravyatyāga’ can also mean ‘the abandonment / renunciation of wealth’. Vedic
sacrifices could be quite expensive. It was thus indeed necessary that the patron who
offered one should ‘renounce’ a good amount of his money.
The expression ‘pūrvaga’ literally means ‘(something that) precedes’. Sometimes, as

here, the expression refers to a cause which, as such, necessarily precedes its effect; or

knowledge that is preceded by a means of knowledge. Injunction does not precede selfrealization in this sense. Self-realization is not necessarily attained by following
scriptural injunctions in the way an effect necessarily follows from its cause.
ṣvayaṁpratha- literally means ‘experiences’ or ‘knows’ itself.

TANTRĀLOKA

(vedyā), whereas consciousness is subjective (ahaṁrūpā), eṭernal and self-

revealing (to one’s own experience). (125-126) (125cd-127ab)
‘Thus’, for that reason, namely that its nature is consciousness, ‘that’

(which is one’s own Self) is, in accord with the dictum that ‘this Self has shone

forth (just) onceʼ, in its unceasingly (active) form as unconditioned

(consciousness), consists of the reflective awareness of the light of supreme ‘I’
consciousness. Thus, it is ‘self-revealingʼ, that is, it is proved to exist by itself
(svataḥsiddha), independently of (any) means of knowledge etc. ‘Therefore’ no

preceding injunction, the nature of which is to impel one who is not engaged in

action (apravṛtta) and is ‘a creation (of consciousness), which is (just) a

means to attain this or that accomplishment (siddhi), (can apply to Him).

Bhairava is pure consciousness which, although it generates everything within the

field of objectivity, is never an object. Bhairava knows Himself directly, spontaneously,
just as He truly is. He is the pure universal subjectivity in relation to His emanation,

which is objective (vedya), in the sense that it is an object of consciousness that ‘can be

knownʼ (vedya). Objectivity is the characteristic feature of emanation. As such, a deity

which is the object of worship and devotion is also an emanation of consciousness. It is
also objective in relation to Bhairava. There are thus, in a sense, two deities. One is the
deity who is the object of worship. This is the embodiment of universal objectivity,
which is multiple and hence at the lower (apara) level. The other one is the universal
subjectivity, which is at the supreme level (para). This is Bhairava. Ultimately,

Bhairava alone exists and so there is no object with reference to which He is a subject.
As such He is the Absolute — Anuttara — that transcends even this universal, sacred
subjectivity in the undefinable eloquence of the One that expresses itself and all that
exists through its self-awareness as the supreme subjectivity, the experience of which is

all that exists.

As deities manifest as objects of awareness, they are necessarily related to
consciousness. They are not independent of it. On the contrary, their ‘luminous’, that is,
perceivable, nature depends on the experiencing subject to make them apparent as an
object of experience. The table does exist when I am not seeing it, because it is possible

to experience it. But in order for it to become a part of my experience, it must
necessarily be experienced by me. In this sense, its experienced existence depends on
me. Moreover, there is nothing beyond experience. Experience is all that there is, in the
sense that it is all that can possibly be known to exist, even if it is not known at present

by every perceiver, or anyone apart from Bhairava, the supreme perceiver. Starting with
this presupposition, the enquiry into the nature of reality is directed at an analysis of the

structure of experience. To say that the object exists by virtue of the experiencing

subject is essentially a statement descriptive of the relationship between the two within

the structured economy of experience. This does not mean that individual objects are

created by the individual subjects who perceive them. The relationship between the

subject and object is mutual. The object is an ‘experience’ not a ‘thing’. But although

there cannot be an object without the subject, the subject can be an object to itself.

Indeed, all objectivity is in various ways such. Seeing the deity as an object of
knowledge, it is not known to be one with the knower.

Read with MSs K, Kh, Ch, J, Jh, T: bodhātmahetunā for tena bodhātmatvena hetunā.
Only MS G has this extra reading, to which is added svātmatattvasya in what appears to

be a gloss on the original reading recorded in the other manuscripts.

See note above in TĀv ad 1/57.
‘ Read ūattatsiddhiṣādhana- for tatatiṣāddhasādhana- and omit the na that follows.

1 translate the word ‘pravṛtta’ as ‘engaged in action’. As an adjective it denotes

‘someone who is engaged in doing something’. Bhairava is engaged in His cosmic


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


This is the meaning. The nature of one’s own Self, which is consciousness,

(never) becomes the field of operation (viṣaya) of injunction, because it cannot

be attained (by following) injunctions. As long as (something) is not attained, it
is a field of operation of injunction, and one’s own Self is never unattained,

because it is (always and) everywhere (in all circumstances) manifest as

accomplished (and proved to exist) from the very beginning (ādisiddha).
Surely (one may ask,) as an injunction consists of a command (that
impels to action) (niyoga) and its execution (bhāvanā) etc., it is said to be of
many kinds. Now of what injunction is one’s own Self not the field of
operation? With this doubt in mind, he says:

vidhir niyogas tryaṁśā ca bhāvanā codanātmikā |

An injunction (vidhi) is (essentially), a command (niyoga) that
impels (to action) (codanā) (as laid down according to the Mīmāṁsā in its

standard) execution (bhāvanā) in three aspects. (127ab) (127cd)

An injunction impels to action someone who is not engaged (in that

action), it does not impart knowledge to one who is ignorant™ As

(Mīmāṁsakas) say:

functions of creation, maintenance and destruction, as well as gracing and obscuring the
soul. In these five functions are included all His countless activities. At the human level,
in this context, the activity in which one is engaged is the performance of ritual, the

maintenance of moral norms, and the rest that scriptures enjoin. A scriptural injunction
impels one who is not thus engaged to act as enjoined. Bhairava is perpetually engaged
in His divine activity in His self-īmpelled, i.e. immanent form. He has no need to be

impelled to engage in His sacred activity. Thus, no injunction or indeed anything else

can ‘precede’ His activity as a cause that impels it.
Read with MSs Ch, Jh, N, Ṭ and D sarvatraiva for sarvadaiva.

See above, note 1,548.
‘ Abhinava explains here what he means in terms of the philosophy of the Mīmāṁsā.

The Mīmāṁsā justifies and expounds the metaphysics and epistemology that is implied
and underlies Vedic ritual, that is, the fire sacrifice (yajīa). According to the Mīmāṁsṣā,
although the Vedas are a collection of hymns to the Vedic gods, they are not really
eulogies, rather they are essentially injunctions to perform Vedic ritual. In order to

expound, establish and defend this view, the Mīmāṁsā developed many terms of its

own, or understood common ones from its own perspective. Abhinava is making use of

one such term which is common to his tradition, but with a different meaning in the
Miīmāṁsā’s nomenclature, to refute the Mīmāṁsā view. This is the term ‘bhāvanā’. The
word bhāvanā is derived from the root bhū, ‘to be’. It means ‘bringing into beingʼ, that

is, in this context, ‘execution’ of an action which ‘brings into beingʼ its result. By

extension, it also means intention, reflection, as well as meditation. It is used with the

last of these meanings extensively in our sources (see, for example, VBh 62 quoted
above in TĀv ad 1/83ab-84cd (1/83cd-85ab)). According to the Mīmāṁsā’s usage,
‘bhāvanā’” means ‘intention’. It is the effort or activity of the agent directed at the

attainment of a desired result, and is expressed in the verbal affix of the imperative. For

example, in the injunction svargakāmo yajet (‘one who desires heaven should
sacrifice’), the injunctive verbal affix (-er of yajer) indicates that one who offers the

sacrifiee MUST realize the final aim, which is heaven.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The characteristic of an injunction is just this, namely, that it impels to
action someone who is not engaged (in that action). An injunction does not
impart knowledge about something that is unknown, for (if it were to do so it)

would be subject to the defect that (it is operating) beyond the extent (of its
defined field of operation, and so would not be an injunction).’

(According to the Mīmāṁsakas,) as an injunction informs (one only
that) the relationship between heaven and the sacrificial rite is that between the
goal and the means to accomplish it, (an injunction) impels only to that extent,
namely, that it gives rise to the knowledge in an individual who has a notion (of
what he is doing) (sapratyaya) that ‘I am engaged in (ritual) action’. According

to the Mīmāṁsakas who belong to Prabhākara’s school, (an injunction is a)

‘command’ (niyoga), whereas according to those who belong to Kumarila
Bhaṭṭa’s school, it is the ‘execution’ (bhāvanā) (of the injunction). There (in
that context), a command is the nature (dharma) (of an injunction) as that which
should be followed, which is essentially what is to be done. Impelling (to
action), it can be articulated (in a statement set in the proper grammatical form
with words having their proper) conjugational and other endings as ‘I am being
impelled (to action). And that (command is expressed in sayings) such as: ‘one
who desires heaven should offer sacrifice with the Dārśa and Paurṇamāsa

(rites).' One can see that (this command) is determined by two associated

factors (anubandha). (One) factor is said to be the one related to the field of
operation (of the command) (viṣayānubanáha), namely, as that to which the

sacrifice should be offered (yājya) and the like. (The other) factor relates to the
competence to do this (adhikārānubandha), as for example, ‘one who desires
heaven’ (is competent to offer sacrifice). Thus a ‘command’ (niyoga) is declared
to be that which is associated with these two factors. The nature of a command
is that it ‘orders (that) something (be done) in some placeʼ. (Now,) the
‘execution’ (of an injunction) (bhāvanā) is the activity, which is application to a

goal

(bhāvyaniṣṭha),

of

the

one

who

executes

(the

injunction)

(bhāvakavyāpāra). The goal (bhāvya) is the fruit, namely, heaven and the
An injunction does not tell us anything that was previously unknown; rather it directs

us to the performance of something to be done. Thus, bhāvanā is the ‘injunction’ (vidhi)
to generate or emit a reality previously non-existent, in this case ‘heaven’. This,

Abhinava says, cannot happen in relation to consciousness, as it is the very
presupposition itself of existence and not something to be attained.
“ MS Kh reads: na jñātajñāpanaṁ — ‘it does not impart knowledge about something
that is knownʼ. MS Ch read: na jñānajñāpanaṁ — ‘it does not impart knowledge about
knowledgeʼ.

Theṣe are Vedic rites performed during a New and Full Moon.

‘“ The followers of the Mīmāsaka Kumarila Bhaṭṭa believe that an injunction is
essentially an intention - bhāvanā — which is executed in accord with the injunction.

Unlike the Mīmāsaka Prabhākara’s view that an injunction is simply an objective
‘commandʼ, Kumarila underṣtands injunctions to be subjective, as they involve
reflection and intention to execute them. The factors involved are termed accordingly.

Thus, the goal is bhāvya, namely, that which one intends to do or considers should be

done, which is the object of bhāvanā —-’intention’. Thus, it literally means ‘that which


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


like. The execution (bhāvanā) is the activity of a person that is applied (niṣṭha)
to that and gives rise to it. The person is the one who (reflects on and) generates

(bhāvayati) by his own activity the intended aim (which he) reflects on

(bhavan), for example, heaven. Thus, it is said to be ‘execution’ (bhāvanā)
(because it is the reflection which gives rise to that). That is of two kinds,

namely, the execution of the word (śabdabhāvanā) and the execution of
meaning (which is the intended aim) (arthabhāvanā). It has three aspects,
because it depends on the three aspects on which one must reflect (bhāvayer),

namely, ‘what’ (is to be attained or done), ‘by what’ (it should it be done) and
‘howʼ (it should be done). That is said (in the following verse):

‘Once the execution has been understood (from the words of the

injunction formed) from the root and affixes, it depends (primarily) on three
aspects, namely, ‘what’, ‘by what’ and ‘how’.”
There are ‘three aspects’ there (concerning) the execution of the
intended aim (arthabhāvanā). ‘What’ (is to be attained) in this connection is
‘heaven’. “By what’ (it should be done) in this connection is the sacrifice, and
‘how’ (it should be done) in this connection is barley and similar (offerings). In
the same way, in the case of the execution of the word (śabdabhāvanā), ‘what
(is to be done) in this connection is the (statement of the) activity (pravṛtti) of a
person (directed at his intended) goal (bhāvyā). ʻBy what’ in this connection is a

word (which enjoins its attainment), and ‘how’ in this connection is the
explanation of the meaning of the precept (arthavādavākya), which is the

operation (vyāpāra) that relates (the two). (A command that) ‘impels (to

action) (codanā) is a Vedic statement concerning what should be done. As they
say:
‘(A command that) impels is a statement that impels to action.’

This (statement) can be related (and linked) to both kinds (of
execution). And (if), understood by means of (some) other authority (pramāṇa),
that declares the (same intended) meaning, it assumes the status of an authority,
and eṣtablishes that that intended meaning (is correct). For example, (in
statements such as) ‘one should offer eleven measures (pāla) as libation to
Indra’, just as libation and other (ritual action) is mentioned, the deities Indra

one considers/intends (should be attained)°. The bhāvaka who executes the injunction is
‘the one who considers/intends (that it should be done)ʼ.

Read svargādikam arthaṁ for svargādikam artha.

Bhāvanā has two aspects. One is arthabhāvanā (i.e. ‘intention with regard to the

goal’) and the other śabdabhavanā (i.e. ‘īntention with regard to what is stated’). Both
consist of three factors. In the first case they are: 1) That which is attained (in this case
heaven). 2) That through which it is attained (in this case the sacrifice). 3) How it is to

be attained (in this case the sacrificial offerings etc.). Analogously, śabdabhavanā

consists of 1) the statement of the goal of an individual’s endeavour by means of 2) a

word or scripture which enjoins its attainment by 3) relating the two in a meaningful

sentence.

See Jhā (1942 second edition 1964) p. 154.

TANTRĀLOKA

etc. are also enjoined (as the objects of worship), because the relationship
between the sacrificial substance and the deity should be declared (clearly and)

directly (sākṣāt pratipādya).

He says just that:


gza

fk šaāī. || g31|

S=ḶINa TYGTTĪ fāēzāīsīī ī fāz: |1 z2¢

tadekasiddhā indrādyā vidhipūrvā hi devatāḥ || 127 ||
ahaṁbodhas tu na tathã te tu saṁvedyarūpatām |
unmagnām eva paśyantas taṁ vidanto ‘pi no viduḥ || 128 I|
tad uktaṁ na vidur mãṁ tu tattvenãtaś calanti te |
(However), only (minor) deities such as Indra, (whose worship) is
indeed ordained by injunctions (vidhipūrva), are attained that way. This
is

not the case with ‘I’ consciousness. Those (who sacrifice to consciou

sness

but) witness only (its) emergent (unmagna) objective aspect, although they

know that (consciousness in this aspect as deity, in truth) know it not.

That

is said (in the Bhagavadgītā, where we read that): ‘they do not know Me in

reality and so they fall (calanti).” (127cd-129ab) (128-129)

(The worship of deities) ‘ordained by injunctions (vidhipūrva)
is

preceded (by an injunction), that is, those deities (who are) ‘preceded’ by an

injunction are those (whose worship) is based on a preceding authority
(pramāṇa) which illumines a matter (artha) not previously understood.

“ Itṭ is normal practice in Vedic ritual, and indeed Tantric pūjā, for particular offerings
to be made to specific deities. Injunctions concerning the worship of a deity therefore
should clearly state what offerings should be made to it.

‘l This line is drawn from BhGī 9/25cd. The word ‘calantī literally means ‘(they)

moveʼ or ‘waver’, implying that they move away or waver from that realityʼ, that
is, fall
from it. This is the reading in the printed edition of the BhGT. However, in Jayaratha

complete citation of this line, the reading is cyavanti — ‘fall’ for calanti — ‘move’
or
‘waver’ which confirms this interpretation. See following line.

‘“ The expression vidhipūrva literally means, as we have seen, ‘preceded by an
injunction’. The full articulation of an ‘injunction’ to worship, for example, in a certain

way, in effect describes as it prescribes what should be done and how to
do it. Thuṣ, a
‘vidhī’ comeṣ to mean not just an injunction, but also the ritual procedure itself
that is
enjoined. Worship is also possible without a preceding injunction as to how it should
be

done, or procedure established by the scriptures, but that kind of worship is not

accord with the authority of the Vedic scriptures. The same applies to Tantric

’ The word for ‘authority’ here is ‘pramāṇa’, which also means ‘means of

ritual.

in

knowledgeʼ.

Scriptures are such in both senses. They are a means of knowledge because
they explain
something not known, and they are authorities because they enjoin action
in relation to
the reality they illumine. But this is only possible because the deities to which
they refer
are made known as objective realities and how they should be worshipped.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Deities (of a lower order that) are separate from one’s own nature are like

(common) objects of knowledge, (with the difference that) their nature is
established by the scriptures, they are not known (pratipanna) by other means
of knowledge (like direct perception or inference). Thus, this view (which is
maintained by the Mīmaṁsakas) is sound. Whereas, on the contrary, one’s own

Self, the sole nature of which is ‘’ consciousness (ahaṁbodha), is for the

aforestated reason, always manifest (prakāśamāna), and so does not require any
means of knowledge to prove its own existence. So it is rightly said that (the
Self) is not the object of preceding injunctions (avidhipīūrvaka). He says just

that (with the words) ‘this is not the case with ‘I’ consciousness’." The
meaning is that it is not the object of injunctions.
Surely, if one’s own Self shines by itself independently of (any) other

means of knowledge,” why is this not always so for everybody? With this

doubt in mind, he says: ‘those’ etc. (For) ‘those’ who worship deities such as

Indra that are separate from their own Self, their own Self is always manifest,
otherwise consciousness of objectivity (vedyavedana) would be logically
impossible, nor could anything else separate from that possibly be the state of

Deity (devatātva). (Thus,) ‘although they know that (consciousness in this

aspect as deity), in actual fact ‘they know it not’, because as they
predominantly perceive objectivity, they would not know it as one with the
perceiver. This is the meaning. Thus, they fall (from the higher state of
consciousness) by accepting this or that particular limited (niyata) deity and the

like (as their own and rejecting their own consciousness). That is said there (in

the Bhagavadgītā):

‘They do not know Me in reality (as 1 truly am) and so they fall.’

He explains that.

aT || 2281I
calanaṁ tu vyavacchinnarūpatāpattir eva yā || 129 l|

(What is meant by) ‘falling’ is nothing but the assumption of a
limited form (by consciousness as one who worships and the gods, instead

of attending to his own consciousness). (129cd)

He corroborates this (view) also with a verse there (in that same book).

devān devayajo yāntītyādi tena nyarūpyata |

Read ahambodhas tu na tathā iti avidhipūrva ity arthaḥ for ahambodha iti tathā iti

vidhipāūrva ity arthah.

! Read with MSs Ch, J, Jh, Ñ and T yadi for yāda.
‘ Read with MSs K, Ch, J, Jh, ṄÑ, and T: pramāṇāntaranairapekṣyeṇaiva for

pramāṇādi-nairapekṣyeṇaiva.
BhGI 9/25cd.

TANTRĀLOKA

This is why (Kṛṣṇa) has said: “they go to the gods who worship the

gods.™™ (130ab)

‘This is why°, because the reason (for that is) ‘the assumption of a

limited formʼ. This is the meaning. As is said (in the Bhagavadgītā):

‘Those who are devoted to the gods go to the gods. Those who are
devoted to the ancestors go to the ancestors. Those who worship ghosts go to

the ghosts, and those who worship Me go to Me.""

Surely, if this is so, how is it said that those who are devoted to other

gods also offer sacrifice? With this doubt in mind, he says:

frācṣa āāā ā 3 ṁ̄ afaradāṝ ftaṝrq 1| 23011

aaç |

nimajjya vedyatāṁ ye tu tatra saṁvinmayīṁ sthitim || 130 ||
vidus te hy anavacchinnaṁ tadbhaktā api yānti mām |

However, those who, having submerged (these gods’) objectively

perceivable nature (into consciousness), know there the abiding state (sthiti)

(of reality) which is (pure) consciousness."® (Thus says Kṛṣṇa,) “even

though they are devoted to that (particular divine form), they go to Me who
am unconditioned.” (130cd-131ab)
‘There’ (means) within the deity, that is separate from one’s own Self.

‘They are devoted to that’ — the meaning is that they offer sacrifice to a deity

who is separate from their own Self. (They attain) ‘Me’, that is, the Self the

nature of which is one with supreme consciousness. (The true) sacrifice (yāga)
is (a state of constant) abiding (avasthāna) within this supreme nondual

(reality), as consciousness, and the attainment of that is itself the fruit.

Surely, the Lord Vāsudeva uses the word ‘Me’. This, the first person, is

singular (and so refers only to Himself), thus how is it said that pure

consciousness (which is impersonal and not Kṛrṣṇa) is denoted (by it)?™ With

this doubt in mind he says:

TṀTT| RITS āTIHĒTHF: |I 232 II

130a is an abbreviation of BhGT 9/26ab.
BhGī 9/26.

‘ The most authentic sacrificial action is the state of being established as pure

consciousness in the supreme nondual nature. This eternal, abiding state is both the fruit

of worship and the means to it.

“’ The question here is that if Deity is essentially pure consciousness, it should be

impersonal, however Kṛṣṇa never refers to Himself impersonally in the Bhagavadgītā.

He always refers to Himself as ‘Me’ or ‘] .


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


sarvatrātra hy ahaṁśabdo bodhamātraikavācakaḥ |) 131 ||
sa bhoktrprabhuśabdābhyāṁ yājyayaṣṭratayoditaḥ |

Everywhere here (in all these verses, the personal pronoun) ‘I’

denotes only pure, (awakened) consciousness (bodha) which, by the words

‘enjoyer’ (bhoktṛ)” and ‘Lord’ (prabhu) refer to it as the one who offers
sacrifice and (the deity that is) the object of (his) sacrifice, (respectively).”’

(131cd-132ab)
‘Here?

in

the

Bhagavadgītā,

the

intention

is

to

expoundN

unconditioned pure consciousness, thus it is said that it talks about (vācaka)

consciousness alone, upon which it reflects. It is not even possible that there can
be a second reality apart from the Light of consciousness that can serve as its

counter-correlate which is to be negated (as ‘not the Light’), because then (the

one light of consciousness) would be affected by the (conceived dualistic)
option (vikalpa) (that distinguishes between) a shining state (of the light of

consciousness) and one that is not. In the case of the body, (when one says), for

example, “I am thin”, this reflective awareness of ‘’ is just a thought construct
(vikalpa), because it is possible for there to be a counter-correlate which is to be

negated in relation to the body (i.e. “I am not fat”)." But surely (one may ask),

if consciousness is just one and has no counter-correlate (i.e. the absence of

consciousness), how can the relative distinction (bheda) as the ‘one who offers
sacrifice and the object of (his) sacrifice’ be ultimately real, (for Kṛṣṇa to say

that) ‘they offer sacrifice to Me’ and the like? With this doubt in mind, he says
(in the second sentence): ‘the enjoyer’ etc. The point is that consciousness

alone manifests as the nature of both (the sacrificer and the deity). That is said

there (in the Bhagavadgītā):

‘I am the enjoyer and Lord of all the sacrifices.
Surely (one may ask,) how can one logically justify that the one
(consciousness) is the nature of both? With this doubt in mind, he says:

‘ According to Swami Lakshmanjoo, the bhoktṛ [enjoyer] is the sādhaka [practitioner].
” Abhinava is commenting on BhGT 9/25ab.

Read pratipādayīṣitatvāt for pratipipādayiṣitatvāt.
‘ The ‘I amʼ in such experiences one has of oneself as ‘T am thin’ is a notion, not

consciousness, because it entails the opposite proposition, its counter-correlate ‘I aṃ not

fat’. The pure subjectivity of ‘I amʼ, which is not related to the body, cannot have any
counter-correlate, i.e. ‘T am notʼ. This cannot be a proposition, although it is a statement,
because although we have a subject, nothing can be predicated of it, and thus it does not
really amount to a proposition at all. The system frames in the most proximate words
possible what is essentially beyond the framework of a logical structure. It is dealing
with trans-empirical experience, that is, experience wherein the relationship between
subject and object no longer obtains. This is possible because consciousness
encompasses both without being either, although it is initially discovered in the subject.

BhGī 9/25ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

fe ara

Yyājamānī saṁvid eva yājyā nānyeti coditam || 132 ||
nānyākṛtiḥ kuto ‘py anyā devatā na hi socitā |

It is said that consciousness itself is the sacrificer and that the

object to which sacrifice is offered is none other than that. (Deity has) no
other form (than this) at all (kuto ‘pi). (For) another deity (than this) is
not appropriate (as an object of worship). (132cd-133ab)
‘It is said’ʼ, that is, asserted ‘that consciousness itself is the object to

which sacrifice is offered’. For there is no reason ‘at all’ that that (supreme

deity may have any) ‘other formʼ, such as Indra etc. Moreover, that
consciousness itself is ‘the sacrificer’. There is ‘none other’ (i.e.) different
(consciousness). The meaning is that the sacrificer is made of nondual
consciousness. Or else (one could say that) it is not proper for the deity of

consciousness to have a form like this,° because duality (bheda) within

consciousness is logically unsustainable, as (anything that is) separate from
consciousness is insentient. Nor is it logically possible for the insentient to be

deity, which is one with the luminosity etc. (of consciousness). Thus

consciousness itself, which is self-luminous and one, manifests as the nature of
each single (thing). So it is rightly said that ‘He (the Lord) is said to be (both)

the one who offers sacrifice and is the object of his sacrifice.’

Thuṣ it is said that nothing, including injunctions and the like, can serve

as a means (nimitta) to prove (the existence of) consciousness, because it is

proved from the start. Accordingly, he says:

fatkra āīTē: āhīsa m-āĩte gftrīa aI || 2331|
vidhiś ca noktaḥ ko ʻpy atra mantrādi vr̥ttidhāma vā |/ 133 ||

Emend na tvākṛtiḥ to nānyākṛtiḥ as Jayaratha reads the text when he writes na punaḥ

kuto 'pi hetoḥ anyākṛtiḥ indrādirāpā.

The very form of the deity is pure consciousness, although consciousness cannot

have a form, for that would entail an untenable duality within consciousness. Nothing

supposedly different from consciousness could ever appear within consciousness. It is
self-illuminating consciousness that manifests in this way. Deity is not an inert object as
is an idol. Only consciousness is deity and so the only appropriate object of worship.

Read with MSs Ch, J, Ṅ and T sā hy evaṅvidhākṛtimatī for ṣā hi evarṅvidhākṛtīḥ

ākṛtimatī.

‘ The ‘form’, that is, nature of the deity, is pure consciousness, although in reality

consciousness has no form. There can be no duality within consciousness. If there were
any other reality apart from consciousness, it would be unconscious, and so could not

appear anywhere within consciousness. It is self-illuminating consciousness that
manifests in this way. The nature of Deity is not like the manifestation of an inert object.

devatātvaṁ yujyate — literally ‘possess the state of deity°.

‘õ Read with MSs K, Ch, Jh, Ñ, and T: dyotamānatvaikasvabhāvam for
dyotamānatvādy-aikasvabhāvam.
N TĀ 1/132a(132b).


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


And (so) neither injunction is stated here (in our view to have
anything to do with consciousness) or the (Vedic) Mantras etc., that are the
domain of its functioning (vrtti). (133cd) (134ab)
Vedic statements (vedavākya) are of two kinds, namely, Mantra (i
the Vedic hymns) and Brāhmaṇa (which are later texts containing the exegesis
of the hymns, ritual and the exploits of the gods).® Again, the statements
(vākya) of the Brāhmaṇas are of three kinds, namely, a) injunction (vidhi)

(concerning ritual action), b) eulogy (arthavāda) (of deities and accounts of

their exploits), c) exegesis (naming and explaining) (nāmadheya). Statements
concerning injunctions have no function (vyāpāra) there within consciousness.
This is the sense of what (Abhinavagupta) is saying. In the same way, Mantras
and the like do not operate there. This is because Mantras and the like are the

‘domain’ and basis ‘of its functioning°’, that is, of the activity which is the

function of injunction (vidhivyāpāra), and without that (basis that) activity is

not successful. Nor can any duality (bheda) possibly arise within consciousness,
such as the relationship (between) the denotator (word) and the object of
denotation (meaning), or the sacrificer and the object of sacrifice. Thus, it is
proved that there is only one consciousness, which is proved to exist (a priori)
right from the start.
Sureḷy, if this is so, how is (it that) this unfolding flow of all things
(viśvaprasara), which are sentient and insentient, (possible)? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

Obscured and Unobscured Consciousness

GISJTTHTTTTa
fkzrāī sTgŪē 7ā: |
JIĪĪTJTTGTI Ñ ŪqāTTRTAATĀTTĀTT; ||g
3% II

TITCHTTTZJ R̥ATĪTĒ̄ fĒTT |

so ʻyam ātmānam āvṛtya sthito jaḍapadaṁ gataḥ |
āvṛtānāvṛtātmā tu devādisthāvarāntagaḥ || 134 ||
jaḍājaḍasyāpy etasya dvairūpyasyāṣṭi citratā |
This (consciousness) veils itself, and having done so, is present on
the plane of the insentient. Half-veiled and half-revealed, it is present (in

living beings) starting from the gods right down to plants. Each of these

According to Monier-Williams: ‘The Brāhmaṇa is a portion of the Veda revelation

(as distinct from its Mantra and Upanisṣad portion) and consisting of a class of works

called Brāhmaṇas. They contain rules for the employment of the Mantras or hymns at

various sacrifices, with detailed explanations of their origin and meaning and numerous

old legends. Each of the three Vedas [not Atharvaveda] has its own Brāhmaṇa.’

TANTRĀLOKA

two forms (of consciousness), sentient and insentient, is wonderfully
diverse." (134-135ab) (134cd-135)

‘Having veiled (itself)ʼ, that is, having manifested the contracted state

(of consciousness) by the power of Māyā, the (very) nature of which is the
concealment of one’s own (innate conscious) nature. This is the meaning. ‘The
plane of the insentient’ is the multitude of phenomena (bhāvarāśi) that are
made manifest by (some) other (reality). This is the meaning. Initially, the

Supreme Lord (Who is pure consciousness), wishing to create the universe,
illuminesṣ it (within Himself in such a way) that it is not separate (and diṣṭinct)

from Himself. This is said in various places in the scriptures to be the first
creation (ādisarga). Subsequently, if He wishes to create (the universe) by
means of Māyā, He then causes to pour forth by His own innate freedom, in
the mirror of His own Self, the endless series of manifestations (ābhāsa) of the

two, subject and object, and from the midst of the multitude of phenomena
(bhāvarāśi) which are His own body (svāṅga) He causes the (physical) body,
vital breath (prāṇa), intellect and Void to become the perceiver by projecting
(onto them) the agency, which is essentially the subjectivity present within

Himself (svagatāhantā). After that, by setting aside (His own) conscious nature,
He induces sound (and the other sensations), as the field of objectivity (idantā),

to assume the state of the objects of perception (of the subject). Therefore, the
body and the rest assumes into itself (the subjectivity) of the knower (jñātṛtā)

and the agent (kartṛtā) and what is (separate and) other than that, (the

objectivity) of the object of knowledge and action.™ Thus, they are called

‘sentient and insentient’, and he says that by saying (that the Lord’s

consciousness is) ‘half-veiled and half-revealedʼ.
Moreover, in this way he also says that He is endless by virtue of the

wonderful variety of His (two) modalities (prakāra), (with the words) ‘each of

theseʼ, etc. The ‘wonderful variety° there of the insentient is due to the (many)

“’! Possibly Abhinava begins his paraphrase of a passage from the TBh beginning here

(134-135ab (134cd-135); certainly up to 136ab (136) and possibly also up to 137ab

(137).

Read with MSs Kh, Ch, J, Jh, Ñ, T and D ullāsayati (‘causes to pour forth’) for

ābhāsayati (‘shines forth’).

Thus, the psychophysical organism functions as agent and knower, that is, as the
subject.

‘’ Jayaratha explains that initūally, the Lord who is pure consciousness, wishing to

create the universe, illumines it within Himself in such a way that it is not separate and
distinct from Him. This is the first creation (ādisarga). It is followed by Maāyā’s
creation. When He wishes to create by means of Māyā (the universe of duality), the

Lord illumines by His own innate freedom, on the mirror of His own Self, the endless

series of manifestations of subjects and objects along with the body, vital breath
(prāṇa), intellect and so on. The perceivers are those manifestations and aspects of the

Lord that partake in varying degrees in His self-awareness, that is, ‘I-ness’. Conversely,
external sensorial objects, such as sound, are characterized by ‘this-ness’. They

apparently manifest separately from consciousness, which is subjective, and so assume

the status of objects of perception. In other words, the psychophysical organism assumes

the aspects of agency and cognitive subjectivity in relation to the goals of its activity

and objects of knowledge. The former is sentient and the latter, insentient.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


different words (and entities they denote) etc. And that also, due to the varying
(intensity of insentience, according to whether it is) more or less weak, is of
many kinds. Although the (variety of the) sentient (aspect) is also endless,

because of the diversity of (the many) families (of living beings), it is of many
kinds, because of the diversity of hierarchy and the rest of the three fetters.
(Thus the countless) contracted perceivers wander (around) in this

and that state in accord with (their) hopes (for the result of) each of (their)
actions (karman), and as (they) are devoid of the understanding (buddhibhāva)

of ‘right’ (dharma) and ‘wrong’ (adharma), and expelled (into the outer

world) by this and that desire, they know their own Self (svātmānam),

although (just) one, as being various and as having many forms. Moreover, they
perceive the insentient object (of the senses) as a multiplicity, insofar as it gives
rise to pleasure and pain etc.
What is the cause (nimitta). of this variety in this way? With this
question in mind, he says:

āīa aāaaīaṁ fē fē f ā fatrāātq 11 3u11
ā fn-rai
daa sfr ahk a 1
tasya ṣvatantrabhāvo hi kiṁ kiṁ yan na vicintayet || 135 |
tad uktaṁ triśiraḥśāstre saṁbuddha iti veīti yaḥ |
He (the Lord of Consciousness) is free. What may He not
conceive?® That is said in the Triśiraḥśāstra, (which declares that) one who
knows (this wonderful diversity) is well awake (saṁbuddha). (135cd-136ab)
He supports (his view by referring) to that (Tantra) (not by quoting it
literally but by paraphrasing) on the basis of the meaning, (and so says) ‘that is
saidʼ etc. ‘One who knows’ (this) wonderful diversity ‘is well awake
(saṁbuddha)’. The meaning is that he is properly (and perfectly) (samyak)
awake. That is said ‘īn the Triśiraḥśāstra’ that is, in the venerable

Triśirobhairavatantra. There much is said (in a passage) beginning with:


The three bonds are, as we have seen, the three Impurities (nala), namely individual

(fundamental) impurity (āṇavamala), Māyā and Karma. See above 1/22 ff comm. and

notes.

% Read with MSs Ch, J, Jh, N, T and D saṅkucitāḥ for saṁkucitā.

Read with MSs Kh and Jh-bahiṣkṛtatvena for -pariṣkṛtatveva. This reading is

supported by the one in a verse quoted by Jayaratha from the Triśirobhairavatantra in
the commentary on the following verse.

Read jānanti for jānate.

Swami Lakshmanjoo suggests the reading vicinayet — ‘discern’ for vicintayet

‘conceive’. But that reading does not fit the metre. The first line of this verse is quoted

in the MM (p. 45). The second half there reads ‘kiṁ kiṁ yatra vicitrayet’ (‘where and
what may he make various?”) for ki kiṁ yan na vicintayet (What may He not
conceive?).

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Otherwise, one who possesses little wisdom (bodha) (and does not
know this), plays within the cage of the body hanging on the thread of the
impurity (that sullies his soul) (mala), like a small insect (that plays) with the

threads (of a garland on which it sits).”

It goes on: ‘one should know him’ (who knows this) to be properly

(and perfectly) awake .. .” and ends with: “(the fettered soul) wanders about

like an actor with many forms of external signs (of his sentiments), devoid of
sound understanding," expelled (into the outer world) by (his) desire and lack
of forbearance (akṣema).”
Surely (one may ask,) even if the body etc. is considered to be the
perceiver, it is (nonetheless) insentient and so is an object of knowledge; thus,
how can it have this sort of cognitive consciousness (jñāna)? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

šravaī fē frzīztcorareōīaāṁ
aT || q3ē|

jñeyabhāvo hi ciddharmas tacchāyācchādayen na tām || 136 ||

Objectivity is a quality of consciousness (cit); its shadow cannot

cover it!” (136cd)

Objectivity is a quality of cognitive consciousness (jñāna). (The

cognition) ‘l know (this) entity does not (imply) any excellence on the part of

the entity (by virtue of which it can give rise to cognition), rather the cognitive
nature of that (cognition) belongs to cognitive consciousness alone. And that is

said here” (in the Triśirobhairavatantra) also:

‘the objectivity of the object of knowledge is noetic consciousness

(jñāna) itself (eva).”

Thuṣ, insofar as they are objects of knowledge, ‘the shadow’ of the
body etc. ‘cannot cover” consciousness, because something cannot be its own
obscuring covering. (It cannot obscure consciousness) in such a way that it
would not be cognitive consciousness of this sort. Thus, even though it assumes

Read with MSs Kh and J: -buddhaḥ sa for —buddhas tu.
T1 tentatively have emended svabuddhibhāva- (‘own

underṣtanding’)

to

subuddibhāva- (‘sound understanding’). MSs K, Kh read: icchājñeyabahiṣkṛtaṃ —
‘expelled (into the outer world) by (his) desire and objectivity° for
icchākṣemabahiṣkṛtam — ‘expelled (into the outer world) by (his) desire and absence of
forbearance (akṣema)’.

This is a paraphrase of a line in Trisirobhairavatantra quoted literally in the
commentary.
“ One may suppose that by ‘here’ Jayaratha means the Tantrāloka, but as this reference
is missing in the TĀ, I take him to mean the Triśirobhairavatantra.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


the body etc. as itself, the (essential) conscious nature of the Self is not

compromised at all That is said there (in the Triśirobhairavatantra) itsel:

“The (essential) nature of the object of knowledge is consciousness, and
its shadow cannot cover (it).’


Thus, he says:


STTTIHTTTTĪ
ā!Tr rT fkrāz 1| q3.1
tenājaḍasya bhāgasya pudgalāṇvādisa
U
anāvaraṇabhāgāṁśe vaicitryaṁ bahudhā sthitam || 137 ||
Thus, the wonderful variety of that sentient aspect (variously)
called, for example, the individual soul (pudgala) or atom (of consciousness)
(aṇu), rests in many ways in the aspect (of consciousness) that is
unobscured.
‘Thus’, because (objectivity) does not obscure consciousness, the
‘unobscured’ (aspect) is the Self, the nature of which is pure consciousness.
This is the meaning. Even though the body etc. are consciousness by nature,
initially (āmukha) they manifest as objective (jñeyatvena), and so may also be
impure (even though they rest in the pure, unobscured consciousness of the
Self).
Surely (one may ask,) if division is logically impossible within

consciousness, how can one explain the wonderful variety (of levels of

consciousness)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

%eāt || g3¢ ||

saṁvidrūpe na bhedo ‘sti vāstavo yady api dhruve |
tathāpy āvṛtiniṛhrāsatāratamyāt sa lakṣyate || 138 ||

Although there is no real division (bheda) (of levels) within
consciousness, which is always stable (dhruva) (and invariable), even so it is
perceived (to exist) due to the gradation (of the progressive) decrease of the
veil (that covers it).

‘The decrease of the veil’ is the dwindling away of individual
(fundamental) impurity (āṇavamala). ts ‘gradation’ is the degree (in which it
takes place,) which is slight, middling, or much. It is for this reason that (a
division of levels of consciousness) ‘is perceived’. The point is that it is
certainly not possible (to perceive divisions within consciousness) directly. This
The point is that even though the reflective awareness of consciousness is associated
with the body, the nature of the Self is not affected in any way.

TANTRĀLOKA

is why he qualifies (the word ‘division’ by saying) before that that it is (not)
‘realʼ.

says:

Now what is that gradation (tāratamya)? With this question in mind, he

āaezam: vīhqraṁaroṝā |

T-ĪRTTTT |I 2381
tad vistareṇa vakṣyāmaḥ śaktipātavinirṇaye |
samāpya paratāṁ sthaulyaprasaṅge carcayiṣyate || 139 ||

We will talk about that extensively in the course of explaining (the

nature of) the descent of the power (of grace) (śaktipāta), and having
concluded (the matter) present in the first (part), it will be discussed in the
context of matters pertaining to ritual (sthaulyaprasaṅga) (in the second

part).


As he will say:


‘The manifestation of the gradation (tāratamyaprakāśa) of the descent
of the power (of grace) (śaktipāta) is these (three degrees), namely, intense,

middling and weak. Each of these is of (these same) three kinds.’

” See below, 13/129cd ff. where the nature and gradations of the descent of the power
of grace is discussed in detail.

The second line of this verse is not easy to understand. Jayaratha’s explanation does

not make good sense and does not seem to be relevant. Indeed, it may well be that

Jayaratha’s reluctance to comment on every word is really due his own uncertainty
about the meaning of this difficult line. For this reason, it seems, he invites the reader to
work it out for himself. In verse 145, Abhinava clearly defines the gross activity
(sthaulyavibhrama) of knowledge as being the power of action. In verse 163 he

confirms this usage by saying that action, which has as its essential nature knowledge, is
the ‘grossness’ (ṣthūlatva) within itself that transports the multiplicity within it.

Jayaratha explains that ‘grossness’ is the outpouring of duality. This is the level of ritual
action which is in the domain of the Individual Means — the ‘gross means’ʼ (sthūlopāya).
The other two — the Empowered and the Divine — are subtle and supreme, respectively.
Accordingly, I understand sthaulyaprasaṅga to mean, basically, matters pertinent to
ritual. Ritual procedure is taught and its nature discussed from Chapter Fifteen onwards.
While this seems fairly clear, the reading samāpya paratāṁ as it stands is not. The

variety of variants, different in each manuscript, is possibly indicative that the scribes
were also perplexed. It seems that Abhinava may be referring to the first half of the
Tantrāloka. Once Chapter Fourteen is concluded, he will talk about the rituals. These
begin with the rites of initiation that are graded according to the competence of the
aspirant. Moreover, the Impurity that obscures the soul is progressively removed by

means of them. Accordingly, 1 have tentatively emended the reading to
samāpyāparagaṁ, i.e. ‘having concluded (the matter) present in the first (part)ʼ, taking
it to be an ascriptive of an unstated ‘arthamʼ i.e. ‘matterʼ, ‘subject’ or ‘teaching’.

“ Below 13/129 (129cd-130ab).


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Beginning with this (verse, this matter) ‘will be discussed’, defined and

examined in many ways.” This is the meaning. The point is that here (in this
chapter) is enunciated all that is to be understood, that will be discussed (in the

Tantrāloka). As he will say:


‘All (the topics discussed in the Tantrāloka) are announced in due order
in the (first) chapter, which deals with the various forms of consciousness

(corresponding to the means to realisation).”

For fear of making the book excessively long, we have not explained
this (verse) word for word. Thus, one should understand it for oneself. In this
way, in accord with the progressive decrease of impurity, one also perceives the

Lord's nature of one’s own Self." He says this (next).

Concerning the Means to Realization’

Preliminary Analysis of the Means based on Will, Knowledge and Action

īfTṁ̃ Ṁard faṛ: 1

Concerning these three moments of enunciation, definition and investigation, see
below 1/246ab-277ab (1/246-277).

“’ Below, 1/288cd (287ab).
l Read ātmano for ātmanāṁ.

°!! Abhinava now turns to an exposition of the means to realization, which continues up
to 245. Verses 140-170 are a general preliminary analysis. In the first three verses,

Abhinava outlines the fundamental principles on which practice is based. The one
reality is pure consciousness which, from different points of view is equally the
Absolute, Deity and the Self. Ignorance of this one reality is binding, because it is the
condition in which the many individual souls perceive themselves, the world they live in
and the one ultimate reality as distinct and separate from one another: This sense of
separation is accompanied by conceptualization (vikalpa), which identifies and labels

the countless unique particulars and sets them into relationship with one another in time
and space. This is inferior — apara — knowledge with respect to that of one’s own

essential nature and of all things as pure, divine consciousness, which is supreme — para
— knowledge. Inferior knowledge is not just an absence of knowledge. It is partial

knowledge. Supreme knowledge is complete knowledge, which includes inferior
knowledge and fulfils it. Even so, inferior knowledge obscures superior knowledge so

long as the latter is not fully grasped. Thus, there is nothing to attain that is mis ng. The
path to liberation is the progressive removal of ignorance. The means to do this, which
Abhinava outlines in the following verses and then discusses in detail in the following
four chapters, belong to four categories. These are 1) Anupāya — No Means;
2) Śāmbhavopāya — literally Śiva’s Means, which 1 call the Divine Means (214-220); 3)
Śāktopāya —- the Empowered Means (221-241); 4) Āṇavopāya — the Individual Means
(242-245). The last three correspond to three aspects of the one triadic (Trika) reality,

namely, Śiva, Śakti and Nara, the individual soul. The first corresponds to Anuttara as
the fourth Inexplicable that is all three and yet transcends them. From this perspective,

Anupāya does not just mean ‘No Means’, it also means anuttaropāya, that is the Means
which is Anuttara itself or the direct means to it, which is the most excellent (anuttara)

of all.

TANTRĀLOKA

ataḥ kaṁcit pramãtãraṁ prati prathayate vibhuḥ |

pūrṇam eva nījaṁ rūpaṁ kaṁcid aṁśāṁśikākramāt | 140 ||
Thus, while the Pervasive Lord (vibhu) reveals His own complete

form (in all His fullness) to a certain perceiver (pramātṛ), (He does so) to

some (other) part by part, successively.

(The Lord reveals His own complete form to) ‘a certain’ (perceiver) by
the (rapidly heightening) gradation of the intense modality (vṛ1ti) of the decrease

(of obscuration),”" and to another (perceiver) ‘part by part, successivelyʼ, in

accord with the gradation (tāratamya), ranging from slow (manda) onwards, in
which the (obscuring) covering decreases.
Surely (one may ask,) what is the full (pūrṇa) and incomplete (apiūrṇa)
state of the Supreme Lord’s nature? With this doubt in mind, he says:

[ek eea|ḶersEĀĀHSḤ

JIṬĪ TT T TGdCT
ag 1| 2.42I|
viśvabhāvaikabhāvātmasvarūpaprathanaṁ hi yat |
aṇūnāṁ tat paraṁ jñãnaṁ tadanyad aparaṁ bahu || 141 I|

The (full and complete) experience (prathana)” of one’s own

nature as the one Being (bhāva) of all beings is the supreme (para)

knowledge (of Deity) individual souls possess. Inferior (apara) and multiple
is that (knowledge) which is other than that.
‘The one Beingʼ is the fundamental Being (sartā) which is the supreme
light (of consciousness of all beings, that is,) of all phenomena (bhāva), such as
(the experience of the colour) ‘blue’, ‘pleasure’ and the like, because otherwise

their manifestation (lit. ‘shining’) would be logically impossible. That is the
essential nature of the ‘(full and complete) experience of one’s own nature’,
that is, the direct experience (of that) by means of the dynamic modality (of
consciousness) which is free of thought constructs (avikalpavṛtti). That alone is

Read with MSs Ñ, T and Ḍ -nirhrāsatāvṛti- for —nirhrāsatāvṛti-.
! Read kacit iti tīvranir̥hrāsatāvṛtútāratamyāt | kaṁcid iti aṁśāṁśikākramāt for

kaṁcit iti ũyranirhrāsatāvṛtitāratamyam aṁśāṁśikākramāt.

! Cf. below, 1/156-157. This is a full knowledge (pūrṇaprathā) of onē's own true
nature and that of every single thing individually and of all things collectively. This is

not just information or the knowledge of something that once acquired can be stored
away with other data. It is a continuing ongoing ‘perception’, which is another meaning

of the word prathana. The word also resonates with the sense of ‘unfolding’ or

‘extending’ insight. This does not mean that more is known thereby that was not known
before. It is full and perfect knowledge, nothing more needs to be known. The moment,
as it were, that ignorance develops, it instantly blocks it. In this way, perfect knowledge

never arises in this timeless processless process of perpetual enlightenment. Knowledge
in this sense is liberation itself. It is not just the cause of it.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


the full and ‘supreme knowledge individual souls possess’ of the Supreme
Lord. The knowledge of the empowered (and individual means to realization,)
which consists of thought constructs, ‘is other than that’ kind of full (and
complete) (pāūrṇa) knowledge. 1t is ‘inferior, that is, incomplete (apūrṇa),
because it is devoid of the unfolding insight into the (true) essential nature of

consciousness (citsvarūpaprathā). It is ‘multiple’, that is, it is of many kinds,

in accord with the manner that will be explained. This is the meaning.
He (now) expounds the multiple types (of this knowledge).

rr̥īT̄+ fāftrnfrṝtfzṝ
ftzrt qx3 1
prathamānaṁ vicitrābhir bhaṁgībhir iha bhidyate || 142 |

And that (knowledge), revealed (prathamāna) through the means

that is direct as well as (those that are) means to that (direct means) etc., is

divided here into (wonderfully) diverse (vicitra) modalities.””

‘That (knowledge) is supreme or inferior knowledge. ‘The means
that is direct’ is the Divine Means (Śāmbhavopāya). That alone is the
unimpeded instrumental means (nimitta)’™ to the attainment of supreme
knowledge. When that has reached (its) supreme summit (parākāṣṭhā), it is
called No Means (Anupāya). Thus, it will be explained that No Means is not just

! One could also translate: ‘the unfolding insight into one’s own conscious natureʼ

Consciousness is not directly recognized to be the one all-encompassing reality and so
appears to be a separate reality that differs from insentient objectivity.

!One could also translate ‘prathamāna’ as ‘experienced’. The full and perfect

knowledge of the true nature of Śiva consciousness, which is our true nature, is both a
perpetual ongoing ‘experience’ and a ‘revelation’.

' Śupreme knowledge is the direct experience of one’s own true nature, and hence all

things, unmediated by any means. Inferior knowledge develops through and as the

various means to realisation (upāya), which have ‘wonderfully diverse

aspects'. These

belong to three categories that are aspects of the unfolding liberating insight or
knowledge (vijñāna), which is the main subject of this chapter as a whole. What has

been said up to now prepares the way for the summarial exposition of these three

categories of practice here. Beginning with No Means, which is ‘supreme knowledge’,
they will be described in detail in the following four chapters. It is possible to attain
liberating insight into one’s own Śiva nature through any one of these types of means, or
they may combine, leading one to the other in a virtually unlimited number of

combinations. Thus, each one may be of a superior or inferior type, according to
whether it leads directly or indirectly to realisation; some may be obstructed more,
others less, thus adding further to their possible variety. See following verse.

! Jayaratha refers to the means to realisation — even the most direct one — as an

‘instrumental cause’ (nimitta), not a direct cause (kāraṇa), which can only be Śiva’s
grace (śaktipāta, anugraha).

TANTRĀLOKA

the negation of (all) the ordinances of the means (to realisation as ineffective).’

The means to that Divine Means is the Empowered (śākta) one, and, by the
word ‘etc.’, (he indicates that) the means to that is the Individual (āṉava) one.
(Thus, the one means to realisations) ‘is divided’, (but this) division is (just)

figurative (not ultimate). This is the meaning.
Such is not the only reason (nimitta) for this wonderful variety, there is
also another. Thus, he says:

TTITTATTĪTĒT ṬITúG; TāTd |I gX31|
tatrāpi svaparadvāradvāritvāt sarvaśo ʻṁśaśaḥ |
vyavadhānāvyavadhinā bhūyān bhedaḥ pravartate || 143 ||

There (in that case) also, these (means are of) many kinds,

according to whether they are (direct or) mediated with regard to
themselves or another, in all respects or part by part, with or without
interposed (obstacles).

“With regard to themselves’ as, for example, the Śāmbhava (sṭate

attained directly) by the Divine Means (Śāmbhavopāya). Thus (when he says

'Read with MSs K, Ch, J, Jh, K, T and DḌ nopāyavidhiniṣedhamātram (‘not just the

negation of (all) the ordinances of the means (to realisation as ineffective)) for
nopāyaniṣedhamātram (‘not just the negation of (all) the means (to realisation as
ineffective)?). Śāṁbhavopāya is the direct means to attain that unobscured, supreme
knowledge that reaches the supreme summit (parā kāṣṭhā) of attainment, namely,
Anupāya. Anupāya, which literally means ‘No Means’ʼ, is not understood by
Abhinavagupta to be just that there is no means to attain the one reality. It is not just a
matter of ‘letting go’ of attachments or abiding in Silence, realizing that all is already
full and perfect and so there is nothing to attain. It is the Divine Being of the Absolute

Deity, Who spontaneously reveals Himself in all His fullness as His supreme act of
grace, understood as an infusion of the Deity°s divine transformative power. It is not just

a mere negation of all means. It is Śiva’s supreme act of grace, that liberates the
individual soul without any effort on its part once and for all. So it is the goal of all the

means to realisation through which Śiva graces the soul.

The word ‘śāmbhava’ is derived from the name ‘Śambhu’ for Śiva. Śaāmbhavopāya

(herein translated as ‘the Divine Means’) thus literally means ‘the means pertaining to
Śambhu (i.e. Śiva)ʼ. The corresponding state to which this means corresponds is
Śāmbhava, that is, Śiva’s own state. Similarly, ‘Śāktopāya’ (which I translate as ‘the
Empowered Means’) literally means the ‘means pertaining to Śakti’, and ‘Ānavopāya’
(which I translate as ‘Individual Means’) is the ‘means pertaining to the aṇu, that is, the
individual soul. Thus, the three means correspond to the triadic ~ Trika — state of the one
reality, namely, that of Śiva, Śakti and Nara (the individual soul). Thus, the three means
are based on, and lead to, their corresponding states. Each of these is the full and
complete triadic reality experienced from one or other of these perspectives, and so each

means is based on, and leads to, the same ultimate reality — Anuttara. Also understood to

be Bhairava, Abhinava equates it with No Means (Anupāya), which is the fundamental
state of the one reality, which is the Light of Śiva consciousness. In this case each
means is direct, although they may require more or less time and operate in different


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


that the means may be) ‘mediated with regard to themselves or anotherʼ, (he
intends to say that what is) ‘mediated’ has a means (in other words, one means

serves as a means to another). ‘In all respects’ means (that a particular means
to realisation operates) completely and ‘part by part’, partially. (The means
may be) ‘with interposed (obstacles)’ because the direct means (to realisation)

is absent In this way, initially the means to realisation is of three kinds

because it is divided into the Divine (Empowered and Individual means). As
each one of them can be mediated with respect to one another, (the three are) of

two kinds and so are six.” These are again of two kinds, according to whether
each one is complete (pūrṇa) or partial (apiūrṇa), making twelve (varieties).
Theṣse are again of two kinds, according to whether each one of them has

interposed (obstacles) or not, and so there are twenty-four (varieties). Moreover,
as the interposed (obstacles) are of many different kinds, so the varieties (of

means) are many.
Surely (one may ask,) in this way (tāvat) knowledge has been

introduced as that which is to be attained (upeya). Thus there (in that case),

there should be some means (to attain it), and that is not knowledge itself,

because that is what is to be attained. Nor is it ignorance, because that cannot

serve as a means to that. So what then is the nature of the means (to attain it)?


With this doubt in mind, he says:


dH, || .x |

jñānasya cābhyupāyo yo na tad ajñānam ucyate |
jñānam eva tu tatsūkṣmaṁ paraṁ tv icchātmakaṁ matam || 144 ||

The means pertaining to knowledge is not said to be an absence of
knowledge (ajūāna), (rather) it is knowledge itself; (however,) that which
domains. Although this is a possibility, one means may lead to another and so are
arranged in a hierarchy.

The ‘direct means to realisation’ in the fullest sense is the immediate recognition that

one’s own nature is pure Śiva consciousness. This takes place in the most perfect
practice of the Divine, that is, Śiva means to realisation, that develops spontaneously
into No Means by the most intense form of the descent of Śiva’s power of grace
(Śaktipāta). Then there is no mediation of any means — it is direct attainment of the
supreme, liberated state. If this does not take place, then the practitioner must resort to

other, more or less, indirect means.
Any one of the three categories of practice can by itself lead directly to realisation.

Thus, there are three kinds of practice. Or else, one category of practice may lead to
another, which then leads directly to realisation. Thus, each category is of two types,

making six in all.

If the means leads to realisation without further practice and grace, it is ‘complete’
or, if not, ‘partial’.

Read tadanaupāyikatvāt for tadanaupayikatvāt.

The Empowered Means is jñānopāya — ‘the means based on knowledgeʼ i.e.

conceptual knowledge (vaikalpikajñāna). See below, 4/2-6. Fundamental to
understanding the nature of practice and how it operates is the distinction between

TANTRĀLOKA

is more subtle than that is considered to be the supreme (means). It is (the
power of) the will (icchā) (to realisation that achieves its goal
instantaneously).”
However, ‘that which is more subtle than that’ ‘is considered to be’
different from the gross, conceptual knowledge of the Empowered and other
(means). This is the prose order (and connected sense of this sentence).” Thus
it is the ‘Supreme (Means)’, which is the Divine (Śāmbhava) one. This is the
meaning. Thus it is said to be ‘an (intense) intent (icchā)’, (whereas) the

essential nature of the Empowered and Individual (Means) are (the powers of)
knowledge and action. This is the overall sense.
Surely, even so, (one may ask) how is it logically possible that the
relationship between a means and a goal (upāyopeyabhāva) pertains to (reality)
which is just one? With this doubt in mind, he says:

3JRTIJHITT]
JTTS TĪGATHJH: |

|I Çx4, 1I
consciousness free of thought constructs (nirvikalpa) and with them (savikalpa).
Formulated for the first time by the Buddhists, the distinction between these two forms
or aspects of consciousness has a long history and is generally accepted by all schools of
philosophy and teachings, although variously understood. Generally, the former is a
liberated state compared to the latter, which is bound by thought constructs. The Divine

Means operates in and as consciousness free of thought constructs (nirvikalpa). The
other two are within its domain.
See above, verses 26 and 27, where Abhinavagupta maintains that ignorance is
limited knowledge, not an absence of it or essentially different from it.
The translation is in accord with Jayaratha’s interpretation. However, one could also
(probably better) understand this verse as referring to two means of realisation. In this

perspective, the first sentence concerns the Empowered Means, which is based on the
exercise of the power of consciousness to know (in the sense of perceive and conceive

correctly). The second may then be taken to refer to the Supreme Means (paropāya i.e.
SŚāmbhavopāya), which is based on the initial intention to perceive and conceive that
impels it (cchopāya). t is the first moment of perception (prathamikā-locana) which is
the perceiverʼs state of self-awareness free of thought constructs (nirvikalpa). In that

case the translation would be as follows:
‘The means based on knowledge (which pertains to Śakti) is not said to be (a

form of) ignorance (which evolves into insight), but is (in fact ultimately) knowledge
alone. The Supreme (Means) is considered to be subtle (compared to the other two in
which thought still operates), and is a (direct) intent (icchā) (to realisation that achieves
its goal instantaneously).”

Htis clear from his commentary that Jayaratha understood the meaning of this part of
the verse to be ‘(rather) that is knowledge itself which is considered to be subtle and is
the supreme (means) which is the (intense) intent (icchā) (to realisation).” Here, it seems

to me, Jayaratha may not be correct. The three main categories of means to realization
are 1) Supreme, whichis based on intent ~

sśāmbhavopāya. 2) Subtle, whichis based on

knowledge — Śaāktopāya. 3) Gross, whichis based on action - Āṇavopāya. 1 understand
‘subtle’ to refer to Śāktopāya andsupreme’ to Śāmbhavopāya. 1 understand this verse

to be referring to the first two means. The following verse, as one would expect if this
interpretation is correct, refers to the third ~ gross — means.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


upāyopeyabhāvas tu jñānasya sthaulyavibhramaḥ |

eṣaiva ca kriyāśaktir bandhamokṣaikakāraṇam || 145 ||

(The sense that there is) a condition which is the means and one
that is a goal is (essentially) an error (inherent in) the gross state of

knowledge,” and that is itself the power of action, which is the sole cause

of (both) bondage and liberation.’”

The ‘gross state’ (of knowledge of reality amounts to) the outpouring

(of manifestation) as the duality (bheda) of endless subjects and objects

(brought about) by the submergence of the supreme, subtle innate nature of the

one compact (uninterrupted union) of consciousness and bliss. This gives rise to
the error (bhrama) that ‘that is the goal and this is the meansʼ. In reality, Śiva

alone, Who is the supreme light of consciousness, is the goal, and He shines
everywhere because He does not cease (to exist) anywhere. Thus, in this case,
no purpose whatsoever is served by (any) means (to realization), because (by
definition) they make known (something that was previously) unknown. That is
said (in the Saṁvitprakāśa) (where we read):
‘When Your true nature is directly visible and (You) abide clearly
apparent in all respects, those who make use of means (to realization) certainly

do not know You.”

No Means will be explained (in Chapter Two) in the same perspective.
(Now) surely (one may ask,) if this is the case, then how can this common

practice (vyavahāra) (of the means to realisation) bring about the development

(of liberated consciousness)?”™ With this doubt in mind, he says: ‘this same

” Another possible translation is ‘The gross dynamism of knowledge is the relationship

between the means and the goal.’ The word ‘vibhrama’ is translated as dynamiṣm. It can
also mean ‘error’, which is how Jayaratha understands it, although he does refer to the

error of duality as an ‘outpouring’. The sense of sthaulyavibhramaḥ can also be the
mistake of the grossness of knowledge. Knowledge is both the means and the goal. Itṣ
arising is instantaneous insight. Either way, the distinction between a goal and the
means to attain it is absent. Abhinava himself clarifies in the next line that when he
refers to the gross state of knowledge, he is talking about action. See following note.

Action is described as ‘gross knowledge’ above in 1/139 and below in 1/145. This is
because, as Jayaratha explains, the action meant here is the process of manifestation.

The arising and falling away moment to moment of what appears within consciousness

takes place as cognitive action. The production of relative distinctions between subjects

and objects and amongst them is the gross form of cognitive consciousness, i.e.
‘knowledge'. The relationship between a means and its goal is analogous to that of the
cause and its effect (kāraṇakāryabhāva). This too, as we have noted already, is
understood in terms of action. The cause being agent, and the effect the product of its
activity. In soteriological terms, activity that generates Karma is binding, whereas acts

of discernment and insight are liberating.

”! SP 1/13, also quoted below in TĀv ad 2/14 and by Śivopādhyāya ad VBh 124 (122).

A common distinction is made by nondualists of all schools between ‘the business of
daily life’ (yyavahāra), also called the ‘relative’, or ‘conventional’ truth/reality, and the
supremely real (paramārthika) or ‘ultimate truth/reality. The other major nondualisms,

TANTRĀLOKA

(power of action)ʼ etc. (It is) ‘the power of action’ because it gives rise to the
state of diversity brought about by the difference between each single thing. The
sense is that for that reason this (universe of subjects and objects) is just the
unfolding expansion (sphāra) of the Supreme Lord. Thus, if (the power of
action) is not known (to be such) in this way, it is binding, whereas if it is
known, it is liberating. He says this (by declaring that it is) ‘the sole cause of
(both) bondage and liberation’. As is said (in the Stanzas on Vibration):
‘This, Śiva’s power of action, residing in the fettered soul, binds it, (but)
when (its true nature) is understood and it is set on its own path, (this power)
bestows the fruits of Yoga (siddhi).’
whether the Buddhist Madhyamika and idealist Yogācāra or Advaita Vedānta,
understand the relative truth as a kind of ignorance of the supreme truth, which gives
rise to the mistake which is the dualistic experience of daily life that is thus not
ultimately real. This is not the case here. Daily life, with its relative distinctions, in this

case, that between the goal of liberation and the means to attain it, is real. However, it is
the domain of ignorance of the one nondual reality which is consciousness, it is the

product of the activity of that same consciousness. Although it is true that there is no
need of any means to attain the consciousness, which is all things and so is already full

and perfect, this does not mean that the means to realisation are not true means. Insight
is the knowledge that they too are the activity of consciousness, as are both the fettered

and liberated state. Thus, because that activity is liberating, one should engage in

practice in earnest, not simply give up making any effort. When we do not practice
awareness, the activities we are inevitably engaged in (even that of not doing anything)
are binding.

SpKā 48. The commentators on this verse variously explain what is meant here by

the power of action from different points of view. In the most elevated sense, it is the
supreme energy of consciousness. Itis called ‘spanda’ (‘vibration’, ‘pulsation’) because

it is by virtue of His inner dynamism that Śiva, the one universal consciousness and

innate nature of every perceiving and acting subject, creates all things and acts through
them. At the same time, it is through this, His universal energy, that Māyā -- the world

of dualityis generated. Thus, it has two aspects. Oneis internal and the otheris external.

The internal aspect is one, and free of all change and succession. In this aspect, Śiva's

power of action is ‘set on its own path’. The external aspect leads to duality and the
succession of manifestations which make up action, and so is successive. In this aspect,

Śiva’s power of action residesin the fettered soul. These two aspects operate in opposite

ways. The outer aspect makes action possible for the limited individual soul and hence

subjects him to Karma, that is, the consequences of his actions. The inner activity of

Śiva’s energy is universal and s0 is devoid of Karma.

It is because we perceive reality in the perspective of our limited conceptions
that we make distinctions between the goals we seek to achieve and the means to
achieve them, and so we act, and our actions bind us by their consequences. Ultimately,
the one reality is always present and complete in every respect
~ there is nothing to
attain thatis not ours already, nor is there anything to avoid. Everything forms a part of

the same reality. When we realize this, we experience Śiva’ s power acting within us,
and the things we do are understood to be the actions of Śiva Himself, Who acts freely

within Himself as He does through us and the outer world. The diversity of
manifestation, based on the relative distinction between things and the countless living

beings that perceive them, is possible because Śiva has the power to act and generate it.
Ignorant of this fact, the individual soulis bound, but when he understands that it is Śiva
alone Who acts, and that thisis his true identity with which all things are one, the same

power is liberating. Clearly, the teaching is not to desist from action or not to have any


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Surely (one may ask,) even if this is so, what is considered here (in this
teaching) to be a means (to realization)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

jEḻEEeitv:ĪEIĒEZcE7ATE

JTRITNd āTRTHĪRTIGĀ THĪTTTTḤ I 22ē. II
tatrādye svaparāmarśe nirvikalpaikadhāmani |
yat sphuret prakaṭaṁ sākṣāt tad icchākhyaṁ prakīrtitam || 146 ||

%1) There (as that is so), that which manifests clearly in the first
(moment of perception) within one’s own self-awareness, the sole abode (of
pure) thought-free (consciousness), is said to be the direct (sākṣāt) (means

to realisation) called the will (icchā).

‘Thereʼ, as that is so, that which ‘manifests clearly’ ‘in the first’

moment of perception (prāthamikālocanajñāna), which has therefore arisen
goals. Rather, it is a matter of acting and having goals in consonance with Śiva’s

activity and His goals, mindful that it is He who is acting as our true identity. See
Dyczkowski 1992a: 128-132, 172-173, 259-263.

Verses 146-156 are quoted in the IPKau fl. 76a-76b. This and the following verse

define the highest means to realisation. Then the following two verses define in
descending order, the remaining two.

” A literal translation of the expression ‘prāthamikālocanajñāna’īs ‘the knowledge of
the first viewing’. According to an analysis of the process of perception adopted from

the Buddhist idealist Yogācāra (which is the theoretical basis of the Mahāmudrā

tradition), there are two major phases of perception. The first is free of thought
constructs. This is the phase in which reality ‘as it is’ (yathābhūta) īs perceived directly.

In the second phase, the content of the first phase is analysed and thus rendered

ameṇable to the daily commerce of life (vyavahāra), in which individual objects and
perceivers are identified and known through the process of conceptualization which
characterizes this phase. In other words, by failing to grasp the initial timeless
immediacy of the first moment, perception precipitates into the sphere of thought

constructs in which notions of time, space and form dominate, thus contracting and

splitting up the initial undifferentiated unitary consciousness in which subject and object
are one. The Buddhist idealists, of course, consider it to be pure consciousness devoid of

subjectivity. The view here, on the contrary, is that it is a pure unconditioned

subjectivity of which the flux of subjects and objects is its free conceptual expression.

The first moment of self-reflective awareness is the subtlest state of
knowledge. It is the will, that is, the pure intention to perceive which is the initial

moment of perception (prathamikālocana) (see above, notes 1,1, 1,101, 1,102 and

1,438). Jayaratha explains that it is the direct experience of the nature of manifeṣtation

as the radiant pulse or ‘flashing forth’ of the power of consciousness (sphuraṇa), which

is one with the perceiver. The first phase is the domain of the Divine Means of Śiva
consciousness itself, free of thought constructs. The other means of realisation operate

in the second moment, in which conceptual representation, and with it duality, arise.
Thus, they are not direct means, and attain their goal only gradually. In the initial
moment of perception, it is possible to experience a state of self-awareness, free of
thought constructs. For most people this happens so fast that they are not aware of it.

But if the yogi practices attention to himself as the perceiver, that experience of self-

TANTRĀLOKA

as free of thought constructs and so, because no separate object of awareness
has emerged is within ‘one’s own self-awareness’ʼ, that is, within the pure
effulgent pulse (sphurattāmātra) (of the Light of consciousness), is the radiant
manifestation (of consciousness) (sphuraṇa) as the direct experience (of reality).
As it does not depend on any other means it ‘is said to be the direct (sākṣāt)

(means to realisation) called the will’. The meaning is that it is said to be the
means (to realisation) called ‘Divine’ (Śāmbhava), which is the unobstructed

expansion of the power of the will.

In order to clarify (this point) by teaching an example, he says:


EUEĒJAIIIAAUECIĒĀḤGEAeTczḤI
ṬIT WTa: āTÇRTJFTTHT
fṜTāTHT |I Ṟ4 1
JIĪ S]JĪ fīkrc̄Ṭ̄TTITTZṬSRTSTĪĪTT|
qāazātdafTī
āīā 3 āīzz: || 2:¢ 11
yathā visphāritadṛśām anusandhiṁ vināpy alam |
bhāti bhāvaḥ sphuṭas tadvat keṣām api śivātmatā l| 147 ||
bhūyo bhūyo vikalpāṁśaniścayakramacarcanāt |
yat parāmarśam abhyeti jñānopāyaṁ tu tad viduḥ || 148 II

Just as an entity (bhāva) manifests clearly (and directly) for those

whose eyes (dṛk) are wide open,” without having to (apply their mind to)

awareness develops, and as it does so, he experiences in the very core of subjectivity an
intense desire. This is not a desire for anything objective. It is the immensely powerful

intention to exist and be conscious, to experience Śiva consciousness directly. Free of
thoughts and notions, it is a direct and perfectly lucid awareness of consciousness
which, shining directly as it is in itself, is Lord Śiva Himself. This then is the most
direct (sākṣāt) and clear (sphuṭa) means to realise Śiva, Who manifests thus effortlessly
in a moment. Accordingly, the means is named after Him. It is Śambhu’s (i.e. Śiva’s)

means because it is based on His innate freedom — the freedom of His self-reflective
awareness, through which He knows Himself and does all things.

Thus, those who can practice this means must possess a clear vision, one that is
expanded and unrestricted. Unrestricted by notions and uncertainties, it perceives

directly and spontaneously. The elevated adept who has received the intense grace to
practice at this level must maintain this awareness. This too happens naturally for one
who is ready to perceive Śiva in an instant without need of any other means.

The word ‘bhāva’, which I translate here as ‘entity’, means more literally ‘being’ or
‘state of beingʼ. Thus, it includes all states of consciousness and all else to which the
practitioner may attend, for example the movement of the breath or the junction between
inhalation and exhalation. Most people who try to do so fail to maintain a steady

awareness of that and are distracted by thoughts which obscure, as it were, a lucid and

steady consciousness of it. This is because their consciousness is contracted. An

expanded state of consciousness, free of thought constructs, maintains awareness easily

without having to repeatedly determine the nature of its object as being none other than
itself in that form. Thus, most practitioners resort to other means, such as the repetition
of mantras or breath control, to steady their reflective awareness.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


determine its nature (anusaṁṅdhi), in the same way Śiva’s nature (manifests

in an instant) to some (elevated souls) also.

2) (Whereas, if the clear and certain) reflective awareness (of one’s
own identity as all things) comes by repeated deliberation (carcana) on the
(developing) process of (increasing) conviction (niścayakrama) that is part
of the notion (vikalpa) (that ‘I am

Śiva and all this’), (the wise) know that to

be indeed the means based on knowledge.” (147-148)

‘VIṇ the same way (as the Divine Means operates based on the insight

that) ‘the Self alone is all this’, so too (in the practice of the Empowered

Means), the notion of Self which, although (it initially) includes both aspects,

namely, (the true notion of) Self and (the false one that) is not the Self,” ‘the

conviction that is part’ (of that notion) which is preceded by the negation of

(its) counter-correlate (i.e. that the Self is not all this), by repeated ‘deliberation

(carcana) is progressively purified (step by step) in accord with whether it is to

about to become clear (sphuṭatābhāvin) and so on. Thus, ‘the reflective

awarenessʼ of one’s own nature which is being conceived (in this way)
‘comesʼ (to attain) (the stage of) a direct experience (pratīti) which is
undivided, the nature of which is direct (insight unmediated by thought) of the

sort ‘this is indeed such’.

Read with MSs C, Ñ, T visphārita- ʻwide open’ for visphurita- ‘dynamically

functional’. One may take ‘dṛk’ — ‘the sense of sight’ to stand, by way of example, for

all the senses. Cf. VBh 80: ‘Having cast (his) gaze fixed (without blinking) on a gross
object (directing his attention inward) and making his mind free of the support (of
thought), (the yogi) soon reaches Śiva.’ Also ibid. 84: “One who, immobile, looking at a

pure (cloudless) sky, fixing (his) eyes (on it) without a break, at that very moment, O
goddess, acquires Bhairava’s nature (vapuṣ). And VBh 113 ‘Listen properly, O
goddess, I will tell (you) the teaching. Liberation arises immediately when the two eyes

are just fixed (without movement).”

These two verses compare and contrast the first two means of realisation. The Divine

Means is direct, spontaneous insight, free of thought constructs, into Śiva’s nature as
one’s own true identity and all things. If one cannot practice in this very elevated way,
then it is necessary to make use of the flux of thought to make it progressively more

clearly manifest by the increasing conviction that that is the true nature of oneself and

all things. This then is the next category of means based on Śiva’s power of knowledge.

” The following commentary is entirely concerned with the second of these two verses.

This is probably not because the commentary on the first has been lost. Rather, the first
verse relates to the preceding one concerning the Divine Means that Jayaratha has

commented on already. More to the point is that the second verse deals with the

Empowered Means, which is presented here as an alternative to the Divine Means for

those who cannot apply it to realise their identity with Śiva directly.

Ṭhiṣ Upaniṣadic dictum is also quoted below ad 4/60cd-62ab.

! Read with all MSs ~kṣepitatve ‘pi for ~kṣepitve ‘pi.

See below, 4/4-6.

Read with MSs Ch, Jh, Ḍ and T vikaḷpamānṉam for vikalpyamānam, i.e. ʻwhich is
being made into an object of thoughtʼ.

At the beginning of Chapter Four, in which Abhinava expounds this means, he lists

six stages in the progressive purification of thought up the perfect clarity of the

realisation of one’s own identity as Bhairava. See below, 4/2-7.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘(The wise) know that to be the means based on knowledge’. The

meaning is that they know it is he Empowered Means (Śāktopāya), which is the

unfolding expansion (sphāra) of the power of knowledge. The word ‘indeed’

serves to indicate that (this means) differs from the previous one. Here (by this

means), it is said that thought itself (in this way) gradually becomes thought-

free (pure consciousness). Again, there (one attains that conscious) nature
(experienced in the domain of the Divine Means to realization) which brings

about the direct experience (of reality) as free of thought constructs. Thus, the

two (the Empowered and Divine Means) lead from one to the other.

yat tu tatkalpanākḷrptabahirbhiūtārthasādhanam |
kriyopāyaṁ tad āmnātaṁ bhedo nātrāpavargagaḥ || 149 ||

3) Whereas the means based on action is taught to be (that which
utilizes as a) means (sādhana) an external entity (artha) fashioned (to serve

as such) by that (same) conceptualization (kalpanā). The difference here
(between the means) is not (in their goal, which is) liberation.

In the same way ‘it is taught’ that ‘the means based on action’

(kriyopāya) is of that nature. It is said in all the scriptures that one should

understand the Individual Means (āṇavopāya) to be the unfolding expansion of

the power of action. For that is ‘fashioned’, that is, conceived by one’s own

creativity (svaśilpa) by means of these

(countless) thoughts

which

are

(essentially) perceptions of duality (bhedaprathā). The ‘means (sādhana) to
that is an ‘external’ particularized (limited) ‘entity (artha) such as the

Thought, imagination, conceptualization, reflection, discernment, and all the other
functions and aspects of thought (vikalpa) operate in the practices that can be classified

as belonging to the Individual Means, just as they do in the Empowered Means. The

essential difference is that practice in the domain of the Individual Means takes its
support from outer entities. Thus ritual, the recitation of Mantra, and even yogic practice
based on outer supports such as the vital breath or visualization of deities, cosmic orders

etc. belong to this category of means. The form of conceptualization is basically the
same as in the Empowered Means, in the sense that whatever the outer support may be,
it is to be conceived and understood as being essentially consciousness, its radiance,

awareness, powers and the like, until everything that is done and its support are realized

to be one with the agent, and hence Śiva.
Both sustained by the power of the will Śiva Himself has to realise Śiva, the

power of action is not essentially different from the power of knowledge. Indeed, the
latter develops from the former and so can resume its former nature. Knowledge turns to
action and action reverts to knowledge. The activity the practice of yoga and the
performance of ritual involves ultimately evolves into liberating knowledge by

cultivating the will, that is, maintaining awareness of the essential subjectivity from
which it issues forth. See following verse.
Instead of bhedo nātrāpavargagaḥ, ĪPKau reads bhedo nātrāpavargataḥ, i.e. the
difference here (between them) is not due to (differences in the form of) liberation.’

“ Read tadātmasvarūpaṁ for tat ātmasvarāpaṅ.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


recitation of Mantras. The word ‘whereas’ (serves to indicate that this means is)

a separate one (from the Divine and Empowered Means). Thought is the entity
(artha) (that serves as the basis) in the Empowered (Means). Here (in this case,
an) external (entity does s0) also. Thus, the recitation of Mantra and the like is
not (a part) there (of the Empowered Means).

(But) surely, (one may ask,) should there not be a difference in the goal
due to the difference in the means? With this doubt in mind, it is said that: ‘the
difference here (between them) is not present (in their goal, which is)
liberation’.” Liberation is the (ongoing) experience (prathana) of one’s own

(true) nature, and that is (attained) by all (the means) insofar as they lead to

one another.” This is the point.

Surely, it is commonly declared that knowledge alone is the means (to

realisation), so how is it that in (the sphere of the) the individual soul it is said
that action is the means? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Knowledge Extends into Action and Develops into Yoga

TTTĪTHTTĪ JĪTTSIIST |Ṟ40
yato nānyā kriyā nāma jñānam eva hi tat tathā |
rūḍher yogāntatāṁ prāptam iti śrīgamaśāsane || 150 ||
For

action

does

not

differ

(from

knowledge),

rather

that

knowledge" itself is such (tathā), for by developing (and becoming firm,)

MS T reads bhedo ‘trānāpavargagaḥ, i.e. ‘the difference here is present in what is
not liberationʼ.

.Cf. below, 1/156.

Here perhaps Jayaratha is not quite correct. This may be so, but Abhinavagupta has
said that each means may by itself lead to liberation. See above, 1/143.

“ What is meant by ‘knowledge’ here is clearly knowledge of Śiva (śivajñāna), that

arises by the removal of the Impurity whichis theignorance that obscures the soul (see
above, the quote from the Svāyambhuvāgama TĀv ad 1/46). Itis also foundin the Śiva

scriptures. Thus, we read in the Svāyambhuvāgama (1/4cd-6) concerning the ten
Śivāgamas and eighteen Rudrāgamas of the Siddhānta:
jñānaṁ śaivaṁ para

ṭ uhyaī yat tat tārakam uttamam |

cintāmaṇir ivātrāso sthitis sarvasya kārakaḥ I

ekam eva śivajñānaṁ vibhinnaṁ daśadhā punaḥ |1
athāṣṭadaśabhūto ‘pi deśāntaravisarpitaḥ ||

‘Knowledge of Śiva is the supreme secret, which is the most excellent saviour
among the various kinds of knowledge, including that of the Veda and the like, in
accord with the various kinds (bheda) of Śiva knowledge. (Śiva)is like a wish granting

gem that is present here and is the creator of them all. Again, thereis just one Śiva
knowledge thatis divided ten-fold andis also the (group of) eighteen that has come
forth in another place.”

TANTRĀLOKA

the (highest) limit of Yoga is attained. (It is said) in the venerable Gama
teachings (śāsana)-

The Gamatantra has not been recovered. However, it is clear from the references

Abhinava supplies in various places further ahead that it was a Bhairava Tantra that

taught Kaula doctrines. Thus, it is an appropriate scriptural authority to sustain a Trika
Kaula view. Yoga is a feature of most, if not all, Indian religious traditions. As a means
to the attainment of the higher realities taught in each one, the forms of Yoga and the

manner in which it is understood and defined varies in accord with what these realities

are understood to be. As discussed by Somadeva (2004: 235-243), broadly speaking
some of the most common are: 1) Bringing the activity of the mind to a halt through
detachment (vi-yoga) of the perceiver from the objective world (Yogasūtra), leading to
the liberated isolation (kaivalya) from Nature and its qualities (guṇa) (e.g. YSū 4/34). 2)
The Jain view that it is disjunction (a-yoga) of the impurity of Karma from the soul
(Chapple 2003: 26). 3) Yoga is absorption in contemplation (samādhi) (Bhoja
Rājamārtaṇḍa p. 2). 4) Yoga is a means to worship God (Kṣemarāja NTu ad 1/8). 5)
According to the Saiddhāntika Nārāyaṇakaṇtha, Yoga is what the literal meaning of the
word is, namely, ‘union’ in the sense of the state of conjunction with Śiva
(sivasāyujyatā). Similarly, Vaiṣṇavas teach that liberation is a state of conjunction with
Viṣṇu who is the supreme form of Nature (paraprakṛti) (below, 4/29). 6)
The
Vaiśesikas define Yoga as contact (saityoga) of the mind with the soul brought about by
the withdrawal from the senses (Vaiśeṣikasūtra 5/2/16). 7) Yoga, according to the
Yogabīja (88-90ab) attributed to Gorakhanātha, is the union of opposites like the two
breaths and, above all, the individual and the supreme soul (cf. ŚT 25/1-3ab). 8)
Oneness of the two (ibid). 9) Nondualist Śaiva Yoga, in which Śiva and the soul are
realised to not be different by the rejection of dualist knowledge (Somānanda 7/81-84b

and MVV 1/110c-112b). 10) Yoga is knowledge, which is Śiva’s power.
We may take the following definition of Yoga found in the MV as the most

authoritative one for Trika Śaivites and the one to which Jayaratha accordingly refers. It

says:

‘The (wise) maintain that Yoga (which literally means ‘union’) is the oneness
of one entity (vastu) with another. That which is (this other) entity, is said to be what
needs to be known in order to achieve (the prescribed) avoidance (of what obstructs the
attainment of the goal and what should be adopted to achieve it). It cannot be known in

either of its two forms (as what should be accepted or rejected) without knowledge
(ñāna). Śiva has uttered the knowledge (thus) described so that it may be achieved.”

MV 4/4-5 (quoted below as 16/289ab-289cd (16/289-290ab), omitting MV 4/5ab).

We observe, as Somadeva (2004: 237) points out, that this definition plays on

the dual sense of the word jñāna — knowledge’ — as both spiritual knowledge itself and

the revelation of scripture. In this way it connects two common themes, namely, the

relationship between Yoga and knowledge and the purpose of Śiva’s revelation.

According to this definition, Yoga and knowledge are mutually supportive. The yogi
must achieve oneness only with what has been previously defined as the reality to be
accepted (upādeya), that is, the pure realities of the universe. Accordingly, he should
reject all that is not that and impedes its realisation. Clearly, from this perspective,

knowledge of what these are is a basic requirement for the practice of Yoga. As

Somadeva writes (ibid.), the contrast between knowledge and Yoga in this context is
thus: ‘one between a conceptual understanding of scriptural injunction and
its
appropriation to direct experience.” Accordingly, the MV supports the superiority of
Yoga over knowledge. Abhinavagupta does not. Although he insists that action (kriyā),

which includes both ritual action and yogic practice, is not something (vastu) else


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

(Action) ‘does not differ’ from knowledge ‘because’ ‘that knowledge

itself’, by its development (rāḍhi), that is, growth, having attained the reality
which is the supreme summit and (highest) limit of Yoga, '‘is such’ (tathā), that
is, action. This is what is said everywhere (in the scriptures). This is the
meaning.
Surely (one may ask,) what is the authority (pramāṇa) here (that

supports this view)? With this doubt in mind, ‘it is said’ (needs to be added to)
‘in the venerable Gamatantra’ as the remaining (part of the complete

sentence).


He quotes that very book there (where we read):


aaftrraraṁāraāī
aāī fkkrzṆṝāīzāT 1| zug 1
yogo nāṅyaḥ kriyā nāṅyā tattvārūḍhā hi yā matiḥ |
svacittavāsanāśāntau sā kriyety abhidhīyate || 15I |I|

‘Yoga does not differ (from action) and action does not differ (from
Yoga).” The insight (mati) that, mounted up through the metaphysical
separate from knowledge (vijāāna) (e.g. below 1/232ab (1/232)), he does so in order to

underscore that it is knowledge which is the ultimate source of action and that through
action it operates everywhere.
" This is so because both Yoga and action are impelled by consciousness (see below
1/153). Abhinava is making a point about a matter which is very controversial, namely,

the relationship between action and the cultivation of knowledge of the ultimate nature
of reality on the one hand, and the practice of Yoga on the other. Śaṁkara, the foremost
exponent of Advaita Vedānta, argues on the basis of the teachings of the Upaniṣads, that

the ultimately real Brahman can only be attained by knowledge of Its essential identity

with the Self. The Brahman is unconditioned and eternal, and so the knowledge of this
identity, which is a major theme of the Upaniṣads, liberates from the illusory bondage of

mortality and the suffering that it inevitably entails. The Brahman is pure inactive
consciousness and so cannot be attained by performing Vedic rituals. Śaṁkara

maintains that their performance is enjoined and taught only for those who have not
realised this essential identity. Thus, the knowledge of how they should be performed,

and of all other spiritual disciplines that involve action, is lower knowledge

(aparavidyā) with respect to the supreme knowledge (paravidyā) taught in the
Upaniṣads concerning this identity and its corollary, which is that all that seems to differ
from it is illusory. The classical Yoga system taught by Patañjali in the Yogasūtra
teaches that Yoga is the quelling of the activity of the mind. It is stilled by detaching

consciousness, which is the essential nature of the individual Self, from its fascination

with the activity of Nature. So, although this view is essentially dualist, it agrees that the

ultimate realisation of the highest state of Yoga is the perfect stillness of pure

consciousness.
Here the practice of Yoga is understood differently. It is, as the very word
‘yoga means, ‘union’. It is the process of making all the lower levels fuse with the

higher to ultimately merge them all into consciousness. Yoga is also the withdrawal of

the mind from external objects, to direct it progressively to more and more internal
objects until it reaches the perceiver which is its source and into which it dissolves

away. This is the activity which culminates in Yoga - union - with dynamic

TANTRĀLOKA

principles (tattva), serves to quell the latent impressions (vāsanā) in one’s

own mind,is termed action.

consciousness, that is, merger into it. Free of objectivity, it is quite different from
external action. Participating in the universal activity of consciousness, it is not set in
time and space.

ĪPKau (fl. 79b) and all MSs read -śāntyai (‘in order to still’) for śāntau (‘(engaged)
in stilling%). This seems to be a better reading. However, it is clear from what Jayaratha

says that he had the same reading as that of the printed text before him.
Karma leaves behind ‘latent impressions’ or tendencies deposited like seeds in
the fabric of the subtle body that go on to develop into future experiences in accord with
the past Karma. The impurity of Karma presupposes the Impurity inherent in the
individual soul (āṇavamala) and that of Māyā (māyīyamala), and so these latent
impressions entail the existence of all three.

Arguing for the inherent unity of knowledge and action, which is a major theme of
the philosophy of the Pratyabhijñā, Abhinava quotes TĀ 1/151-155ab in the ĪPVV (vol.

3 p. 258-259). He prefaces this citation with the following remark

‘The learned man who is engaged in activities such as initiation, worship, and
visualization (of the deity) possesses the competence (to perform) ritual action, and (this

competence) is the (contemplative) attainment which is the knowledge of reality. Now

although this traditional teaching (āgama) has been explained in this sense (artha), even
so, this same point (artha) is valid provided there is a root to this matter (artha).

Otherwise, if knowledge is an aid to action, let that be so. (But if someone asks) what is
the manner (prakāra) in
ī which action causes knowledge to increase? (I reply that) that
thisis so because it is seen to be successfully accomplished even by just theimagination

(bhāvanā) alone. If the action (in question) is worship (such that) ‘(My) reflective
awareness that has been (consolidated and) made firm with a sense (bhāva) that extends
right up to the end of the body. (As such) IĪ contemplate, whilst offering all this (offering
of) pleasing flowers and unguents etc. to the Supreme Lord, as being one (with Him and
my Self).” Then it is rightly said that knowledge devoid of (ritual) action such as

worship, does not become firm.”


Cf. NT Chapter Sixteen:

karmī yogī tathā jñānī ācāryas trividhaḥ smṛtaḥ || 66 II
tatra tatra śāstre || 66 || ṭathāpi
karmayogau tu deveśi jñānamūlau phalapradau |
prṛthagbhedo na dṛśyeta jñānād vai yogakarmaṇoḥ || 67 ||
kriyāyās tadviśeṣaphalātmanaś ca yogasya jñānaśaktiṣphāra-rāpatvān na jñānāt pṛthak
bhedo ‘sti, api tu jñānadarpaṇāntaḥ pratibimbitatvena bhinnābhāsatvam iva || 67 || yata

evam

tasmād ācāryamukhyas tu jñānavān sarvado bhavet |

jñānavān paracitsamāveśātmāakapraśastajñānaniṭy vukto yaḥ, sa eva
karmayogādipradhānācāryāṇāṁ madhye mukhya ā̃

vaḥ | sa eva sarvado bhavati |

‘A teacher is considered to be of three kinds: (an expert) in ritual (karmin), a
yogi, and a man of knowledge (jñānin).’ 16/66cd


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

And he explains that himself.

svacitte vāsanāḥ karmamalamāyāprasūtayaḥ |
tāsāṁ śāntinimittaṁ yā matiḥ saṁvitsvabhāvikā || 152 I|

sā dehārambhibāhyasthatattvavrātādhiśāyinī |
kriyā saiva ca yogaḥ syāt tattvānāṁ cillayīkṛtau || 153 1

°"'The latent impressions in one’s own mind are the products of the

(three impurities, namely,) Āṇava, Māyīya and Karma. The insight (mati)

(He is variously described in this way) here and there in the (corpus of)
scripture. Even so:
‘O mistress of the gods, (ritual) action and Yoga (both) bestow (their) fruit and

are rooted in knowledge. Ritual action and Yoga are not perceived to belong to a
separate category apart from knowledge.” (16/67)
(Ritual) action which is its particular fruit and Yoga because it is the unfolding

of the power of knowledge is not a separate category apart from knowledge. Rather,

because they are reflected within the mirror of knowledge, they are as if a separate
manifestation. As this is so:
‘Therefore, the foremost amongst teachers should always be a man of

knowledge.” (16/68ab)

“The man of knowledge’ is one who is always intent upon the knowledge that
is praised as immersion into supreme consciousness. Amongst teachers who are

predominantly (engaged in) ritual action, Yoga and the like, he is the foremost teacher.
(That is how) he should ‘always be’.”

‘ For yogaḥ syāt IPVV vol. 3p. 259 reads yogo ‘pi and for kṛtau kṛteḥ.
Quoting verses 1/152-155ab in the ĪPVV (vol. 3 p. 259), Abhinava introduces them

saying these verses are an explanation of the previous one i.e. 1/151 that he has

presented in his own ‘vārtika’ (mayā ca vārtike etat vyākhyātaṁ). This is the
Tantrāloka, to which he refers in this way elsewhere also. It is not his MVV. Clearly,
the citation from the Gamatantra is verse 151. In the ĪPVv (3, 259) Abhinava refers to it
as ‘Sadāgama’ (tathā ca śrīsadāgamaḥ). The liberating power of intuitive insight,
which is consciousness itself, is a dynamic principle. Other schools such as Sāṁkhya
and Advaita Vedānta maintain that consciousness is inactive. This is because they do
not believe that it possesses an actively applied power (śakti). According to the
Sāṁkhya, although devoid of the power to act, consciousness is an impelling force,

which when present impels the activity of the psychophysical organism, which is
created by the differentiated manifestation of Unmanifest Nature stimulated to do so by

the presence of consciousness. According to the Advaita Vedānta, which denies the

existence of a separate reality apart from consciousness, the ‘substance’ from which it

TANTRĀLOKA

which is the means to quell (them) (śāntinimittam) īs (essentially)
consciousness, that rests on (and deploys) (adhiśāyinī) the group of reality

principles that, located externally, generate the body. This same (insight
and the world is formed is the ignorance of Māyā. Like the snake for which a rope is
mistaken in a dark place, it is the illusory result of a mistake. Thus, in neither view is the
world a product of consciousness, although its presence and existence is essential for it

to exist, whether concretely or as an illusion. Kashmiri Śaivism, on the contrary,

maintains that the world is a creation of consciousness. Moreover, it is not, as Buddhist

idealism — Yogācāra — maintains, an illusory creation, as are dreams. If that were so,

then in that case also, there would be no need to admit that consciousness possesses

Śśakti, that is, the power to create a real world and the means to perceive it.
In the present soteriological perspective, this same power is the dynamic

intuitive insight — mmati — which is present in Śiva, the highest metaphysical principle,

and those that constitute the psychophysical body. Essentially consciousness itself, it is

the true fundamental spiritual nature of ritual action which, as such, serves as a means to
liberation. This is especially evident in the rite of initiation. This is because, as

Abhinavagupta will explain in detail in Chapter Fifteen and the ones that follow which

deal with forms of initiation, it is a transformative ascent of the soul through the
principles. In this ascent it leaves behind the lower impure principles (and with them its

own impurities) to enter into the higher pure ones and through them into union with
iva, the supreme principle.

This process develops in the course of the rite by the systematic utterance of
the Mantras which correspond to these planes of reality, progressing through them as

they are uttered. Śiva’s power of intuitive insight — maati — which is knowledge (jāāna)
of the true nature of the metaphysical principles, also develops in the individual soul in

parallel with this unfolding activity which it itself has inspired. It becomes fuller, more
complete, in consonance with increasingly expanding comprehensiveness of the higher
principles which encompass those below them, until the full and complete (pūrṇa)

knowledge, which is liberation itself, is achieved by reaching Śiva, the highest most

comprehensive level of reality. Thus, knowing its true nature as the one consciousness
which is all things and hence one’s own true identity, because every single thing is

everything, the latent traces and habitual tendencies of the mind born from the
impurities that sully and bind the soul, along with the impurities themselves, come to an
end. Again, as this process progresses, the lower principles merge into the higher ones
above until all of them dissolve away into pure Śiva consciousness. Thus, understood as

a developing upwards series of unions — yoga — the same process is also called Yoga.

“ Concerning this triple impurity and the latent impressions that contract individual

consciousness, see above, 1/23 etc.
This translation accords (as it must) with Jayaratha’s interpretation. However, the
immediate sense is that this intuitive insight ‘rests on the outer group of metaphysical

principles which generate the body.” Or according to the reading in the ĪPKau viśāyinī

for adhiśāyinī, the meaning is that intuitive insight is in the midst of the outer group of
metaphysical principles that generate the body. The following verse, which refers only
to the body and the senses (including inner mental senses), apparently supports that this

was in fact what Abhinava meant. Moreover, he is concerned with the binding latent
traces born of the impurities within the mind that affect the maṁi, which is also
understood to be, at the lower level, ‘the activity of the mind’ (manovyāpāraḥ).

The body is said to encompass two levels, corresponding to two bodies. One is
‘impure’ and the other is ‘pure’. The ‘impure’ body extends through the thirty-one

principles from Earth up to Māyā. These are the principles that constitute objective
phenomena and relate specifically to each individual soul. As such they are not
‘common to all’. Accordingly, a Sivasūtra (1/14) declares that ‘the perceptible is the


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


is both) action and Yoga, engaged in merging the reality principles into
consciousness. (152-153)
(The word) ‘means’ (nimitta) (in the expression sāntinimittam i.e.

‘which is the means to quell (them)’) serves to explain (the sense of the)

locative." By saying that the insight (nari) (that removes impurity) is
‘(essentially) consciousness is meant that its essential purpose is (the

attainment of liberating) knowledge (jñāna). This ‘insight’ ‘rests on' (the

two kinds of metaphysical principles, namely) those that are not common to all

and, ‘located externally’, generate the impure body, in accord with, for

example, (the following) dictum:
‘O Mistress of the gods, deposit (on the body), in due order, all that is
the cause of the creation of the body with the syllable OM (praṇava) (repeated)

thirty-one times.”

bodyʼ (dṛśyaṁ śarīram). The principles beyond or, as Jayaratha understand them,
‘outside’ the impure body of the sphere of Māyā, are those of which pertain to the pure

universal consciousness common to all individual souls. The passage Jayaratha quotes
refers only to those up to Samanā — With Mind (aka the Equal One). Just beyond it, at

the summit of the series of principles within the sphere of immanence, stands Unmanā the Transmental Beyond Mind. This is the intuitive insight (mati) which ‘rests’ on all
the principles and within which they rest, deploying them within consciousness. The
Transmental is the point of contact with Śiva and hence the direct means to liberation.

See above, note 1,625.
“ Verses 1/152-155ab are quoted in the ĪPVY vol. 3 p. 259. There instead of the reading

cillayīkr̥tau, which is a locative, we find cillayīkṛteḥ, which is a dative of purpose — i.e.
‘so that the (metaphysical) principles may merge into consciousness’ for cillayīkṛtau
‘engaged in merging the (metaphysical) principles into consciousness’. Jayaratha points
out that in the course of initiation, ritual action serves to progressively elevate the
individual soul through the lower reality levels, which merge into those above as it

moves through them. Thus, the lower, impure reality levels below Māyā dissolve away
as they are abandoned, and the higher ones emerge as degrees of their merger into
consciousness. Yoga is understood, in accord with the word’s literally meaning (i.e.
‘union’), as the act of conjoining the reality levels (tattva) in the process of, and for the
purpose of, dissolving away (laya) the mind. Thus, in this case it is clear that ritual
action and Yoga are essentially the same process.

“ Verses 152-155ab are Abhinava’s explanation of the verse in the Gamatantra quoted

s 151. Jayaratha is referring to the use of the locative in the expression

‘svacittavāsanāśāntau’ (in 151c above), that is, ‘in order to quell the latent impressions

(vāsanā) of one’s own mindʼ. He is saying that it is a locative of purpose.

“2 Read adhiśāyinī for adhiśayānā.

Read ityādyuktyāśuddhadehārmbhiṇī for ityādyuktyā śuddhadehārmbhīṇī.
“ SVṬ 2/42cd-43ab. Kṣemarāja

comments:

Śśarīrotpatteḥ

.māyādikṣityantaṁ
.tattvāni ekatriṁśataṁ praṇavena
śrīmanniṣkalabhaṭāraka-tulyavyāptikena
śuddhadehotpattyarthaṁ
nyaset

praṇavanyāsāc caitāni prāgdaśāto ‘nyādṛṁśyeva (bhavaṇti) | tathāhī ---- akhyātirāpā
āyā bhedaprāgalbhyāvimohinī asya, kalā pūjādhyānādikiṁcitkartr̥vonmīlikā, vidyā
tāttvikavivekapradā,

rāgo

bhaktyabhiṣvaṅgapradaḥ,

upadeśādiviṣayakalanāpradaḥ, niyatiḥ bhagavadārādhanādau niyāmikā, puṁbhāvaḥ
"ahaṁ śiva eva" iti prathāprarohakaḥ | evamanyat || 42 ||

“The (thirty-one) principles ranging from Māyā to Earth that are the cause of
the production of the body should be deposited thirty-one times with the syllable OM

TANTRĀLOKA

(The other kind are) the metaphysical principles (above Māyā) that are
common to all. (Both kinds are deployed by the power of insight) by the
initiation through the metaphysical principles (tattvadīkṣā) and other such
(means,) as is taught (in the following passage):

O fair faced lady, placing the Path that should be abandoned below,

(and) impel that (breath upwards) until that energy of the Equal One (samanā)

(praṇava), which is as pervasive as the venerable undifferentiated (niṣkala) Lord. By the
deposition of the Praṇava these change with respect to their previous condition. Thus:
Maāyā, which is the absence of understanding (akhyāti), is the (overwhelming) power of
duality and is deluding. Knowledge (vidyā) (on the contrary) bestows true
discrimination concerning the nature of reality. Attachment (raga) bestows (the desire
to) embrace devotion. Time gives the progressive manifestation (kalanā) of the object of
the teachings and the like. Constraint (niyati) constrains (the individual) to worship etc.
the Lord. The state of the individual soul is ‘I am Śiva Himself’. Thus (praṇava) brings
about the development of insight (prathā) and (so) is in this way different (from its
previous condition).”
Clearly, the thirty-one repetitions of OṀ correspond to the thirty-one ‘impure’
principles that extend from Earth to Māyā. Beyond them are the five pure principles

ranging from Śuddhavidyā (Pure Knowledge) to Śiva. They are projected or deposited

in thirty-one places on the body, from the feet up to the head. This is done by touching
that part whilst saying, in the case of Earth (pṛthvī), the lowest principle: OM
PṚTHVYAI NAMAḤ and so on for the rest of them. Cf. below note 15,142.

“ SVT 10/1275cd-1276a. Kṣemarāja comments:

samanāntasya pāśatvād heyādhvatvam | recayed ity ūrdhvena, ity arthāt ||
athopādeyādhvapraveśapramukhāṁ paratattvaviśrāntirāpāṁ yojanikām āha ---...... tadūrdhve conmanā smṛtā |
mano mananamātrarūpam api tatra na kramate na sambhavati, api
mantrarūpaiveyaṁ daśety arthaḥ | ata evātra prāk ---vyāpāraṁ mānasaṁ tyaktvā bodharūpeṇa yojayet |
tadā śivatattvam āyāti paśur mukto bhavārṇavāt || (SVT 4437) ity uktam |
yataś cātra mananaṁ na kramate, ata eva
nātra kālaḥ kalāś cāro na tattvaṁ na ca devatāḥ || (SVT 10/1276).

htu

As (the Path) up to the end of the Equal One is the fetter (that binds the soul),
(that is) the Path that should be abandoned. In other words, one should exhale upwards.
Now he states to what one should be conjoined which, preceded by entry into the Path
that is be taken up, is repose in the supreme principle:
‘above that is said to be the Transmental.’ (10/1276a)
The mind (manas) (consists) only of thought (mmanana). It does not traverse

there (into the Transmental), that is, does not exist there. Rather this (higher) plane is

solely of the nature of Mantra. This is the meaning. Thus (it was said) here before:
‘Having abandoned the activity of the mind, (the soul) should be conjoined with the
conscious nature. Then the fettered soul reaches the Śiva principle and is freed from the

ocean of phenomenal existence.” (SvT 4/437) It is for this reason that thought does not
traverse here. Thus: “There is no time here, (limiting) energies, movement, reality level
(tattva) or deities.” (10/1276cd).


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

Thus, because it quells the latent traces of one’s own mind, (this

intuitive, creative insight which deploys the principles in this way within
consciousness) is ‘action’. Again, that same (action) is Yoga (literally ‘union’),

because it conjoins the principles within consciousness in accord with the

teaching: ‘they maintain that Yogais the oneness of one entity (vastu) with
another.” Those two are not separate from knowledge, and so it is rightly said
that ‘Yoga does not differ (from action) and action does not differ (from
Yogay

“% Concerning the series of twelve phases of the recitation of OṀ, see Appendix to this

chapter. The Equal One (samanā = ‘With Mind’) is the eleventh phase, just below the

energy of the Transmental (unmanā) that flowsinto supreme Śiva consciousness.
““ MV 4/4ab.
“ Above 1/I51ab. The point Abhinava is making here is that Yoga is a form of action

(kriyā). Specifically, it is the act of conjoining all things with consciousness by

recognising their essential oneness with it. This activity is marked by withdrawing the
senses from outer objects and diverting the awareness channelled through them back
into the perceiver. The insight (mati) of the essence of reality that develops in order to

remove the latent impressions of past actions and duality in the mind is a form of action

(kriyā). Those that appear are removed by Yoga and that is action. Note that although
the word ‘kriyā’ does, in common usage, mean simply ‘action’, in a technical sense it
means more specifically ‘ritual action’. According to this view, ritual action (that is,

initiation) removes the three-fold Impurity (mala) that binds the soul, and hence the
latent impressions (vāsanā) in the mind that it generates. Moreover, Yoga, according to

Abhinavagupta, is the process of merging the metaphysical principles into Śiva
consciousness, which is exactly what ritual action is meant to do. Again, we are told that
the process traces the generation of a ‘pure body°. This too is a feature of ritual action.
The prime example of this is initiation. Most specifically it is the regular (samaya)
initiation that Abhinava draws from the Mālinīvijayottara that allows access to his
Anuttara Trika and is repeated by the initiate daily as his regular worship (nityā pūjā).
This is described below in Chapter Fifteen. As an example of how the ritual action is

essentially Yoga or develops into it, Jayaratha summarily outlines an Initiation by

means of the Principles (tattvadīkṣā). Thīs brief, powerful initiation takes place by the
utterance of OM. The sonic energy of OMṀ traverses the body in stages through the

metaphysical principles that are projected onto it as OMis uttered. As we shall see in

detail in Chapter Nine, which deals at length with the metaphysical principles (tattva),

they are divided into two main groups. The first thirty-one principles ranging from Earth

to Māyā are called the ‘impure principles’ because they are within the domain of the
dualistic vision of Māyā. These, as we have seen (note 1,959) constitute the impure

body. The first stage of this initiation is to transform that into the ‘pure body” of the
remaining higher five ‘pure princpples' beyond the domain of Māyā, ranging from Pure
Knowledge (śuddhavidyā) up to Śiva, which is experienced as one with consciousness
and an extension of it. This is done by the mediating experience of their essential
identity with the perceiver, which is the principle of Pure Knowledge that ‘I am all this
sphere of objectivity and all this is me.’ Individual purified consciousness, abandoning

the lower priṇciples, rises through the remaining pure ones, which are experienced as

the higher sonic energies of OM (see Appendix to this chapter) that range from the Point
(bindu) and the Half Moon (ardhacandra) up to the Equal One (samanā). The latter

corresponds to the Īśvara principle, which is the experience ‘ am this’, in which the
subtle objectivity that remains is experienced as one with the perceiver. Iiis just below

pure subjective consciousness, which is not objectivised at all. This is how, by means of

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask,) how can knowledge itself be action? He explains
this by giving an example:

vasstṁ fṁ zrstaidṁ-agīa
a |

ENEVIK iiEza IHCTNHI
loke ‘pi kila gacchāmīty evam antaḥsphuraiva yā |
sā deham akṣaṁ deśaṁ cāpy āviśantī gatikriyā || 154 ||
Even in the world (of everyday life) (loka) the inner impulse
(sphurā) (of consciousness) in the form (of the intention): ‘I am goingʼ,
penetrating the body, the organ (of action) and the location (to which it is

directed),” (results in and) is the movement (of the body).

The ‘inner impulse’ (sphurā) within oneself (in the form of the
intention) ‘I am going’ is the radiant pulse (sphuraṇa) which is consciousness,
the nature of which is the exertive state (udyantrṛtā) (that impels the activity of
the body, senses and mind). It ‘penetrates' the body etc., making it dependent
on itself by revealing its helpless (dependence on the power of consciousness)
(vaivaśyāviṣkaraṇena), and the act of ‘going’ takes place. Thus it was rightly

said that ‘knowledge’ itself is such (namely, action)'”" When the radiant pulse

(sphuraṇa) (of consciousness of the sort) ‘I am goingʼ on the part of one who is

moving is taking place, it penetrates the aggregate of the (organs of action),

namely, the feet etc. of the body, which consists of the agent, instruments (of
inner ritual action, all the principles, lower and higher, fuse together into consciousness

and then into the transcendent beyond, a process which is, therefore, essentially Yoga.

Read with ĪPVY (vol. 3 p. 258-259) deham aḵṣaṁ deśaṁ cāpy for dehaṁ deśam
akṣāṁś cāpy. Presumably, what is meant by ‘location’ is that the impulse to go

somewhere not only impels the body and the organs of locomotion, it also directs them

to some particular place, and so that place also is, as it were, penetrated by it.

‘’ What is meant by ‘knowledge’ here is clearly knowledge of Śiva (śivajñāna) that

arises by the removal of the Impurity which is the ignorance that obscures the soul (see
above, the quote from the Svāyambhuvāgama TĀv ad 1/46). It is also found in the Śiva
scriptures. Thus, we read in the Svāyambhuvāgama (1/4cd-6) concerning the ten

Śivāgamas and eighteen Rudrāgamas of the Siddhānta:

jñānaṁ śaivaṁ paraṁ guhyaṁ yat tat tārakam uttamam |
jñānavibhedataḥ ||
cintāmaṇir ivātrāso sthitis sarvasya kārakaḥ ||

ckam eva śivajñānaṁ vibhinnaṁ daśadhā punaḥ ||

athāṣṭadaśabhūto 'pi deśāntaravisarpitaḥ |l

‘Knowledge of Śiva is the supreme secret which is the most excellent saviour

among the various kinds of knowledge, including that of the Veda and the like, in
accord with the various kinds (bheda) of Śiva knowledge. (Śiva) is like a wish granting

gem that is present here and is the creator of them all. Again, there is just one Śiva

knowledge that is divided ten-fold and is also the (group of) eighteen that has come
forth in another place.”

‘’ Above, 1/150b.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


action) and (their) function (karman), and so the act of ‘going’ is brought


He concludes this (point by saying):


tasmāt kriyāpi yā nāma jñānam eva hi sā tataḥ |
jñānam eva vimokṣāya yuktaṁ caitad udāhṛtam || 155 ||
Therefore, what is (commonly) called (ritual) action is also

(essentially) just (a kind of) knowledge.”” Thus, (although yogic and ritual

action is the basis of this means to realization), what was said (before),””

namely, that knowledge alone is liberating, is (ogically) sound.””
‘Thus’,

because

the

(essential)

nature

of action

is

knowledge.

Accordingly, it is said (by such declarations as): “initiation alone liberates and
s0 too leads upwards to Śiva’s abode’ that action can serve as an instrumental
” Ultimately, knowledge, that is, consciousness, does everything.

’ PKau (fl. 79b) reads mānataḥ for sā tataḥ.
‘’ See above, 1/22.

”” According to Abhinavagupta, knowledge and action are co-extensive. They are not
opposites as they are, for example, according to the Advaita Vedānta. They work
together to attain the goal of liberation. Even so, knowledge is superior to action, as it is
the remedy for Karma. According to the dualist Siddhānta, the soul is bound by the

Impurity (mala) that obscures its essential Śiva nature. Understood to be a separate
reality, it is a sort of substance (dravya) that is removed by the ritual action of initiation,

and that state of purity is maintained by the ritual and other activity that ensues after up
to the end of the initiate’s life. Thus, as Sanderson (1992: 290) explains with regards to

this modified Śaiviṣm: ‘naturally, because Īmpurity is no longer a substance but merely
the unawareness of a self-contracted consciousness, then the nondualists must see the
function of ritual quite differently: if initiation liberates then it must do so not as action,

but as a kind of knowledge coded in action and experienced by the initiator.

Moreover, if ritual is believed to work only because it is a mode of knowledge,

then, as it is not the only mode of knowledge, it need not be the only means of
liberation. Knowledge alone, immediately intuitive or initially discursive, may liberate

without relying on the symbolic activity of riṭual. Ritual has been validated; but it has

been demoted to admit the authenticity of purely gnostic gurus (jñāninaḥ) who have
achieved liberation and deserved authority without being processed by ritual and who
are capable of perpetuating their spiritual lineages by liberating others through oral

instruction or inspiration alone. As we shall see, a heretical pre-empting of ritual is
avoided by understanding this process of direct transmission to be the highest form of
initiation.

’ṢyāSūSaṁ 2 (33)/24cd Svāyambhuvaṣūtrasaṁgraha 2 (33)/24cd (IFP T. No. 39).

māyīyam āṇavan kāmamṃ (> kārmaṁ) etāvad aṇubandhanam |

etac coktaṁ mayā sarvaṁ saṁkṣepāt kanakāṇḍaja | 2 (33) / 23 |I
asṣmāt pravitatād bandhāt parasaṁṅṣthānirodhakāt |

dīkṣaiva mocayaty ūrdhvaṁ śaivaṁ dhāma nayaty api || 2 (33) / 24 |

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The bondage of the individual soul consists (of the three Impurities), Āṇava,
Maāyīya and Kārmaka. I have stated all this in brief, 0 (Brahmā) Born from the Golden
Egg! It is from this extensive bondage that blocks (access to) the supreme state (from

which) ‘initiation alone liberates and so too leads upwards to Śiva’s abode.”

Kṣemarāja quotes this line in SvTu ad 11/199a without naming its source:

yuktaṁ caitat, yataḥ ---- nāsti dĩkṣāsamo mokṣa........... SVT 11/199a

dīkṣaiva mocayaty ūrdhvaṁ śaivaṁ dhāma nayaty api iti hi pratipāditam anyatra ||
dīkṣā ca yair mantraiḥ kriyate, tadvīryarūpā ---..na vidyā mātṛkā parā | SvT 11/199b

sā hi bhagavatī aśeṣavācyavācakātmakajagadabhedacamatkārātmakaśabdarāśvimarśaparamārthā sarvamantrāraṇiṣ tatra tatrāgameṣu nirdiśyate | sā caiṣā
viśvāvamarśanena paraṁ jñānaṁ prayacchati || tac ca pratipāditādhvaprakriyāmayam
evety āha ---- na prakriyāparaṁ jñānaṁ .
.... SVT 11/199c

‘That is a sound (view), for ‘there is no liberation equal to initiation.” (SVT
11/199a) 1t has been established elsewhere that ‘initiation alone liberates and so too

leads upwards to Śiva’s abode. Initiation is the vitality of those mantras by means of

which it is performed. “. . . there is no Vidyā higher than Mātṛkā. (SYT 11/199b) Īt is
she who is the goddess (bhagavatī). She is the reflective awareness of the Aggregate of
Sounds (śabdarāśi) which is the wonder at one with the universe consisting of all the
objects of denotation and (their) denotators. It is taught (repeatedly) in various places in
the scripture that it is the firestick (that lights the fire) of all mantras. It is she who
bestows supreme knowledge by reflecting upon all things. And that (knowledge)
consists of (the knowledge) of the configuration of the path (of the worlds)
(adhvaprakriyā) that has just been expounded. (The Tantra) says this: ‘there is no higher
knowledge than that of the configuration (of the worlds).’

prakriyātaḥ paraṃ anyaj jñānaṁ parituccham eva ||
jñānaṁ .jñeyasya jñāpakam iti pūrvanirūpitanītyā jñātena lakṣaṇīyo yo
lakṣyabhūtaparatattvaikātmā (> -tmyā) yogas tato ‘nyo mitayogo heya evety āha ---..
.nāsti yogas tv alakṣyakaḥ || SVT 11-199d II| avidyamānaṁ paraṁ lakṣyaṁ
āṉtidhāma yasya tādṛśo yogo nāsti | vidyamāno ‘pi mitayoga ihānuttaracarcāyām
ayoga eveti yojanikoktaḥ parayoga eveha yogaḥ || 199 ||
(It is said that any) other knowledge apart from the configuration (of the
cosmic order) is insignificant (parituccha). Knowledge is that which makes the object of
knowledge known. According to this dictum, described previously, Yoga is oneness

with the supreme reality which is the goal (lakṣya) and is that which should be discerned

(lakṣaṇīya) by what is known. Any other than that is false Yoga that should be rejected.
(Thus, the Tantra) says: ‘there is no Yoga that is without a (perceived) goal. (SVT
11/199d) There is no such Yoga of which there is no supreme (discerned) goal which is
(its) abode of rest. Even if there is a limited (degree of) Yoga (mitayoga), here
according to this most excellent reflection (anuttaracarcā) (on the nature of Yoga), it is
not Yoga. The supreme Yoga is said to be that which conjoins (with progressively
higher world orders) (yojanika). Only that is here (considered to be) Yoga.”
The same line is quoted, along with the preceding line, by Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha in
the vṛtti that introduces MrT yogapāda 1/1. Here he briefly outlines the purpose and

function of the traditional division of the Siddhānta Āgamas into sections (pāda), of
which he names the first three of the four (the fourth is the caryāpāda concerned with


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


means (nimitta) to liberation. Thus, it has been rightly said that ‘knowledge is

the sole cause of liberation’.” He says this (by declaring that) ‘what we said
before is (logically) sound

Surely (one may ask,) it was said before (in statements) such as
‘(liberation) is not (some separate reality) that differs from the Self who is

free’”" that liberation is nothing apart from knowledge of the Self. Thus, as

knowledge liberates, (it implies) that what is being said is that they are related to

one another as cause and effect (not that they are the same). How is that

logically possible? With this doubt in mind, he says:
Śiva is all His powers

aq aI: TT. I QUE II
observances). In doing that, he notes how the Vidyā — Knowledge, Kriyā -- ritual action
and Yoga to which the sections are dedicated work together and sustain each other,
grounded in their common basis and goal, which is the liberating knowledge through

which they operate and to which they all lead.

asmāt pravitatād bandhāt parasaṁkhyānirodhakāt (read with K parasaṁsthā- for
parasaṁkhyā-)| dīkṣaiva mocayaty ūrdhvaṁ dhāma nayaty api | iti śruter ikṣāyā

eva
niratiśayakaivalyāvāptihetutvāt
tas;
ca
sarvasya
eva
paśupāśeśvarasvarūpanirūāpaṇopāya-bhūtena samastādhvavyātipradarśakena (> vyāpti-) mantramantreśvarādimāhātmyaniścāyakena jñānena vinā niṣpādayitum

aśakyatvāt

p.

2)

tadavabodhako

paśupāśeśvarasvarūpanirūpaṇāya

pratham

uktah

anekavidhasāṅgadīkṣā-vidhipradarśanāyopadiṣṭaḥ

vidyāpādaḥ

tataḥ

saparicchadaḥ

kriyāpādo

iu

jñānakriyākramajñenāpi sādhakaputrādinā samādhyādyanabhyāsād anātmavidā satā
yathopadiṣṭasvasvavyāpārānuṣṭhānaṁ
saṁpādayituṁ
na
śakyam
iti
prāṇāyāmādyaṅgasahito yogajñaptaye yogapādopakramaḥ |

‘According to this śruti, initiation alone is the cause of the attainment of the

most excellent liberation. As that is so (it is an essential requirement. However,) that
cannot be accomplished without knowledge, which is the means to discern the nature of
the fettered soul, the fetters and the Lord of that (initiation) and all (things).

(Knowledge) displays the pervasion (and extent) of all the Path and instils conviction as

to the greatness of the Mantras, Mantreśvaras and other (beings on the Pure Path). Thus,
the Vidyāpāda (the Section concerning Knowledge) with its chapters, which makes that

known, was taught first of all, in order to describe the nature of the fettered soul, the
fetters and the Lord.

Then the Kriyāpāda (the Section concerning Action) was taught, in order to

explain the procedure by which initiation and its auxiliaries of many kinds (are

performed). Now, it is not possible to accomplish one’s own particular ritual observance
(anuṣṭhāna), as taught by one who knows (only that which is) not the Self, because he
has not practiced concentration (samācdhi) and the rest, be he a sādhaka or a putraka etc.
(This is so) even if he knows the manner of development (krama) of knowledge and
action. Thus, the Yogapāda (the Section on Yoga) is introduced, along with breath

control and the rest of the ancillaries, in order to make Yoga known.

71 Above 1/22d.

“ See above, 1/31a.

TANTRĀḶLOKA

Tfrz̄TarTIGTĪTATTTIT] 1IṞ4.9 1I

mokṣo hi nāma naivānyaḥ svarūpaprathanaṁ hi saḥ |
svarūpaṁ cātmanaḥ saṁvin nānyat tatra tu yāḥ punaḥ || 156 ||
kriyādikāḥ śaktayas tāḥ saṁvidrūpādhikā nahi |
asaṁvidrũpatāyogād dharmiṇaś cānirāpaṇāt |/ 157 ||

Liberation is nothing but the (full and complete) experience
(prathana) of one’s own nature. ”” And the nature of the Self is (pure)

consciousness. Indeed, there is nothing else there.””" Moreover, nor are

those (various) powers of action and the rest other than the conscious
nature, because, indeed, it is unreasonable (to maintain that anything else

can exist) there that is not consciousness, and (also) because (the scriptures)

do not describe (any underlying ground of these powers) that possesses

(them as its) attributes.

(In other words, Śiva, Who is universal

consciousness, is Himself all His powers). (156-157)

Surely, (one may ask,) what is one’s own nature, the experience of

which is liberation? (In response to this question) he says: ‘one’s own nature’
etc., that is, the nature of one’s own Self, which is ‘consciousness’. The
experience of that as it truly is (yathātattvam) is knowledge and that itself is
liberation. So what has been said is sound. Whereas this talk of a relation
(between them) as cause and effect is merely conceptual, not real. As he will

say:

‘As the relationship said to exist between knowledge and liberation is
not primariḷy causal (it is certain that no (such) undesirable consequence

(prasaṅga) (is possible)).

‘Other than’ means separate from consciousness. Surely (one may
ask,) if there is no other nature (rūpa) of the Self apart from consciousness, then
how could it be associated with other powers? With this doubt in mind, he says:
‘thereʼ etc. ‘Indeed’ is in the sense of ‘and’.
Surely (one may ask,) according to such statements as ‘the attributes of

the Lord are (his) powers . . .’ (that declare) that the powers are attributes of the

Lord, they are described as being attributes directly (not secondarily).

(However,) as the possessor of the attributes has not been described, is not the

(reason advanced) unproved? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TT̄HTJTT

’ Cf. above, 1/141 and note.
Cf. above, 1/31. 1/156abc is quoted above in TĀv ad 1/31 and below in TĀv ad
1/331 (330) and in 16/90cd-93ab.

“ Below, 1/162abc.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


YIHTī JĪRTTIITTJ: JVISTT āeTT |I qu¢ 11
pārameśvaraśāstre hi na ca kāṇādadṛṣṭivat |

Śaktīnāṁ dharmarūpāṇām āśrayaḥ ko ‘pi kathyate || 158 II

Unlike Kaṇāda’s view, in the Supreme Lord’s scripture, there

is not said to be any substratum of the powers (to which they are related) as

its attributes (that are separate from it in themselves).

According to the followers of Kaṇāda: ‘The Self (is such) because it is

(inherently) related with ‘self-ness'." By means of such (statements) they

describe the Self as being the possessor of attributes, and having done so accept
that it possesses (various) diverse (transitory) attributes that come (to it) and

recede by declaring, for example, that:

‘Its qualities (guṇa) are sentience (buddhi), pleasure and pain, desire
and aversion, exertion, dharma and adharma, latent traces (of past action),
number, measure, individuality, conjunction and disjunction (vibhāga).
Kaṇāda is considered to be the founder of the Vaiśeṣika school of philosophy. The
first and most basic text of this school is the Vaiśesikasūtra, which is attributed to him.
It is considered to be much older than Gautama’s Nyāyasūtra, but later than 300 BCE.

The Vaiśeṣika ʻtakes its name from the word ‘viśeṣa’, which means ‘a particularʼ. It
emphasizes the significance of particulars or individuals and is decidedly pluralistic.
The Vaiśeṣiīka is mainly a system of physics and metaphysics. It adopts a sixfold
classification of the objects of experience (padārthas): substance, quality, activity,

generality, and inherence, to which later Vaiśeṣikas added a seventh, non-existence. We
find that three of these (substance, quality and activity) possess real objective existence
and we can intuit them; others (generality, particularity, and inherence) are the products
of intellectual discrimination. They are logically inferred, not directly perceived.

Radhakrishnan and Moore (1957) p. 386. These categories are described in detail in the
Vaiśeṣikasūtra.

“ Instead of parameśvaraśāstre, read with MS K and TĀv ad 9/74-75ab where this
verse is quoted, pārameśvaraśāstre.
‘Cf. below, 9/74cd-75ab.
! The Vaiśeṣikas maintain that the Self is the permanent substratum (āśraya) of
sensations and volitions, which unites and coordinates them. Pleasure, pain, desire,

aversion, the will, etc. are considered to be independently existing qualities (guna,

dharma) of the Self, that belong to it as their possessor (dharmin). The Self cannot be
perceived directly, only inferred. Thus, Kaṇāda states that ‘the universal experience of

objects and the senses is a sign that a subject exists which differs from the senses and

their objects.” Vaiśeṣikasūtra 3/1/2. According to the Vaiśeṣika, every individual thing
exists and has a specific nature, because it possesses as its fundamental inherent
attribute the universal or ‘generality’ (sāmānya) which defines it as what it is. A table is
a table because it possesses ‘table-ness’. This reference declares that the same applies to
the Self which is such because it possesses ‘self-nessʼ.


This reference is drawn from a Vaiśeṣika text. Cf Vaiśeṣikasūtra 1/1/6:

rūparasagandhasparśāḥ saṁkhyāḥ parimāṇāni prṛthaktvaṁ saṁyogavibhāgau

paratvāparatve buddhayaḥ ṣukhaduḥkhe icchādyeṣau prayatnāś ca guṇāḥ ʻThe qualities

(guṇa) are colour, taste, smell and touch, numbers, measures, separateness, conjunction
and disjunction, priority and posteriority, notions, pleasure and pain, desire and aversion
and exertions. Kṣemarāja says in SvTu ad 10/678cd: dravyaguṇakarma-

TANTRĀLOKA

(However), here (in our philosophy) it is not said at all that power and
its possessor are related to one another as an attribute is to its possessor in this

way. (According to us,) consciousness is supreme, (that is, transcendent) and
free. (However,) due to the influence of each particular limiting adjunct, it is

said to be this or that (corresponding) power. In reality there is no difference

(bheda) at all between power and its possessor.”” As was said before:

‘Just as there is (no difference between) the fire’s (capacity) to burn and

cook (and the fire itself that always remains one and the same), similarly, what

difference is there in actual fact between the forms (vapusṣ) of God conceived in

various circumstances by the (many) perceivers?’

Surely (one may ask,) what would be wrong if we were to describe the
relationship (between Śiva and His powers) as that between attributes and their
possessor here (in our teaching) also, as in the philosophy of Kaṇāda and

others? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Taā̃ |1| 2u48 1|
tataś ca dṛkkryecchādyā bhinnāś cec chaktayas tathā |
ekaḥ śiva itīyaṁ vāg vastuśūnyaiva jāyate || 159 ||

Moreover, if the powers of will, knowledge, action and the rest were

to be (independent and) separate from (their underlying ground), the

statement (vāc) ‘Śiva is one’ would become devoid of (any) reality.

If there were to be a real difference (bheda) between power and its

possessor, on the analogy of attributes and their possessor, then (statements) in
which it is said that ‘Siva is one only’, such as (the following, would be
meaningless):
‘Śiva is one only. He is the Lord Who comes forth perpetually in this
way in many kinds of forms, moving and unmoving, as (His) play.”

sāmānyaviśeṣasamavāyākhyapadārtha-ṣaṭkam eva tattvam ity abhidadhadbhiḥ kaṇādaŚśiṣyaiḥ.
‘(The Vaiśeṣikas who are) the disciples of Kaṇāda say that reality (tattva)
consists of the group of six realities (padārtha). These are called ‘substance’ (dravya),
‘quality’ (guṇa), ‘action’ (karman), ‘universal’ (sāmānya), ‘particular (viśeṣa) and
‘inherenceʼ (samavāya).

The powers or energies of the Self, the fundamental conscious nature, are not simply

its attributes. Rather, each power is the one absolutely free consciousness which,

differentiated by particular limiting adjuncts, is called that. So, in reality there is no
division between power and the possessor of power.
“ Above, 1/69 (70).


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


As countless entities arise, that are powers and their possessors, this
statement (vāc), which is essentially a declaration of the Lord’s nonduality
(īśvarādvaya), would be ‘devoid of (any) reality’, that is, there is nothing it
would denote (abhidheyarahitā). And so, in this way (iti yāvat) the doctrine of
nonduality would stand refuted.
Surely (one may ask,) if Śiva, Who is consciousness, is in fact only one,
then how is it that the business of daily life (yyavahāra), that consists of many
powers, that is, (the power of) consciousness and the rest, is otherwise? In
order to quell this doubt, he says, as (he) concludes:

[kEzEIEIEEil &EErzIī$īs; ḤHÚECTI
tasmāt saṁvittvaṃ evaitat svātantryaṁ tat tad apy alam |
vivicyamānaṁ bahvīṣu paryavasyati śaktiṣu || 160 ||

Therefore, consciousness itself is this (power of creative) freedom,

which (according to the measure in which) it is conceived (vivicyamāna) as
this or that (power) results in many powers.

This has been explained previously, so there is no need to make an

effort (to go into this matter) again here. As was said (before):

‘Moreover, (the fact that) He possesses many powers amounts to (His

inseparable) union with that (one) power alone.”

(One may ask,) here (according to you,) ‘knowledge of the Self is itself
liberation’, and so in actual fact knowledge and liberation are not related to one

another as cause and effect. Thus, (effectively what you are saying is that)
‘causes do not necessarily (produce their) effects (immediately and in every

case).””" Thus, according to this principle, it is possible that even when the

cause, called the knowledge of those who know (jñānin) (the true nature of
reality), exists, liberation, which is the effect, may not. Should one not doubt

(the possibility of) the contingency (prasaṅga) of this undesirable consequence?


Thus, he says:


Liberation is One, the Means are Many
āTTAICHT

n JHTHG IgĀTTHĪÇTTT |1

TaT ú| 2ē2 |

yataś cātmaprathā mokṣas tan nehāśaṅkyam īdṛśam |

“ The Sanṣkrit here is anyathā kriyate, which can mean literally ‘operates in another
way or ‘is made to be otherwise, in the sense of ‘is considered to be otherwise’

“ Above, 1/67cd (68cd).

’! The same dictum is quoted below ad 4/59 and in the introduction to 9/122.

TANTRĀLOKA

nāvaśyaṁ kāraṇāt kāryaṁ tajjñāny api na mucyate || 161 1|

There is so no such doubt (possible) here (with regards to our
teachings, namely,) that even one who has (complete) knowledge (jñānin) of

that (one ultimate reality) may not be liberated, (because, although

knowledge is the cause of liberation, it may not bring about its result every

time), as a cause does not necessarily give rise to its effect (immediately and

in every case). (This objection is groundless,) because liberation is (in fact
nothing but) the experience of one’s own authentic identity (ātmaprathā)
(and not merely its effect).
The point is that one who has (this) knowledge is certainly liberated.

And so it is sung (in the Bhagavadgītā):

‘Amongst them, the man of knowledge who is always engaged (in

Yoga) (nityayukta) and whose devotion is one-pointed is the most excellent. I

am most beloved by the man of knowledge and he is my beloved.


Again:


Self.”

‘(Kṛṣṇa says): the man of knowledge is considered to be My very

Surely, (in such statements as) ‘knowledge alone is liberating it is

said (implicitly) that knowledge and liberation are related to one another as are
cause and effect, so how is that not an undesirable consequence (prasaiga) (that
effectively refutes this view)? Thus, he says:

ī ī ̄̄ TT īṬS JTr̄] ēT frāq 1| 2.2 1
yato jñānena mokṣasya yā hetuphalatoditā |
na sā mukhyā tato nāyaṁ prasaṅga iti niścitam || 162 |

As the relationship said to exist between knowledge and liberation

is not primarily causal, it is certain that no (such) undesirable consequence

(prasaṅga) (is possible).””

This has been explained at length, so there is no need to make more

effort here (to explain this matter further).

Concluding this (subject), he introduces another.

fBha? ̄JāTã |

“ BhGĪ 7/17.
“ ]bid. 7/18b.

Above, 1/155c; cf. above, 1/35.

’ Quoted above in TĀv ad 1/156-157.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


evaṁ jñānasvabhāvaiva kriyā sthūlatvam ātmani |
yato vahati tenāsyāṁ citratā dṛśyatāṁ kila || 163 II
Thus, as action, which is just knowledge by nature, bears (vahati)
within itself a gross state in this way, behold indeed the wonderful state of
diversity (citratā) within it.
(Action) ‘is knowledge by nature’ because action is invariably
associated with knowledge (that is, cognitive consciousness). As is said:
‘(there is) no action devoid of knowledge . . .
(Cognitive consciousness becomes) ‘gross’ by pouring (out of itself) as
the duality (bheda) which is the inner (division between) subject and object. The
‘wonderful state of diversity’ (of action) is due to the variety of differences
between each particular object of perception etc. (which) ‘thus’ (takes place)
because (cognitive consciousness) assumes a gross (form).


Thus, he says:


kriyopāye ʻbhyupāyānāṁ grāhyabāhyavibhedinām |
bhedopabhedavaividhyān niḥsaṁkhyatvam avāntarāt || 164 ||

The means based on action are divided into those that are perceived

objectively (but are not manifest externally, as is the case with inner yogic
practice) and external (ones, such as ritual). These are innumerable
because they have many kinds of subsidiary divisions and subdivisions.


(The means) ‘perceived objectively’ (internally) are the upward
movement (of Mantra and the vital breath) (uccāra) and the like.”” The external

ones are the fire pit, maṇḍala and the rest (employed in outer ritual). The

upward flow (of Mantra) (uccāra) and the like are on the plane of objectivity,
but even though they are manifest externally (that is, outside the perceiver), they

are not (said to be) ‘external’ because they are not in the field of the sense of

sight and the other external senses, and also because they are not common
(objects) to other perceivers. On the contrary, the fire pit, maṇḍala and the rest
are in the field of the outer senses, and so are common (objects to all

“ The whole line states: ‘there is no knowledge devoid of action and no action devoid
of knowledge.’ It is quoted below ad 14/27ab, see note there.

” See below, note 1007.

TANTRĀLOKA

perceivers). Thus, they are external, and as such are objects of perception.”

Accordingly it is said that (the means based on action are) ‘divided into those
that are perceived objectively (but are not manifest externally) and

external (ones). In this way, although the various kinds (bheda) (of means

based on action) are confined (and limited) (niyata), even so they are
‘innumerable’ and of many kinds because of their subsidiary divisions, that is,
due to their many divisions and subdivisions. This is the meaning. Thus, in the
initial (instance,) there are five kinds of flows (of the vital breath) (uccāra)

because of the (five kinds of vital breath), namely, exhalation (prāṇa) and the

rest. There (in that case) too, there are many secondary divisions, such as, for
example, the Point (bindu), Sound (nāda) and the rest (that are the stations of

development of sonic energy within the flow of the breath). In this way also, the

(number of) Mantras that are uttered (by it) are endless. Thus, the varieties
(bheda) are without number.
And so, in the same way, (he) began (by declaring that): “. . . because
action does not differ (from knowledge) . . ..”” (He then went on) to establish

by means of sound reasoning (yukti) and the scriptures that action is essentially
knowledge. Thus, knowledge is the sole means to attain liberation.
Consequently, the means is not multiple and so its fruit, liberation, is not diverse
aṭall. Accordingly, he says:

ST hāTTTa Ṭekī JTTRTH |

ga- 1| 2 11
anena caitat pradhvastaṁ yat kecana śaśaṅkire |
upāyabhedān mokṣe ‘pi bhedaḥ syād iti sūrayaḥ || 165 11
Thus, the doubts some learned people had are removed, namely

that because there is a diversity of means there should also be a difference
in the (forms of) liberation (to which they lead).

The prose order is ‘some learned people had doubtsʼ. The ‘learned

peopleʼ (to whom Abhinava refers) are the dualists. There (according to their
view,) there is a real difference between the cause and (its) result,' and so

because the causes are diverse, there should also be a diversity of results. Here

(in our view), on the contrary, in accord with the dictum ‘although the Absolute

(Brahman) is (equally in each) place, (It is) omniform, unsurpassed and
inconceivable'"' (we say that) consciousness alone is everything. So what is

” Several practices based on the flow (uccāra) of the vital breath are taught in Chapter

Five below. See especially, verses 5/45 ff. The whole of Chapter Six is dedicated to
practice based on the cyclic flow of the vital breath. Chapters Fifteen onwards are

devoted to means based on outer ritual.

“ Above, 1/150a.

Oṇe could also translate ‘there is a real multiplicity of (both) causes and (their)

resultʼ.

' This line is quoted by Jayaratha four more times below in his commentary on

3/43cd-45ab (45-46), 4/98, 12/5, and 28/375cd-376ab. Read, as in the other places this


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


this difference (bheda) between cause and effect? Even if (you admit) that the

difference between cause and effect (does exist as a) notion, (you have
effectively) accepted that there is only one means (to realisation), which is
line is quoted, pradeśo ‘pi brahmaṇaḥ for pradeśo brahmaṇaḥ. Bhartṛhari quotes this
line in his commentary on the Vākyapadīya (Lahore edition, p. 20). The full line is

quoted in the commentary on the PS (p. 15), where a second line is added: ekaikatra ca
tattve ‘pi ṣaṭṭriṁśattattvarūpatā | `And in every single place in (each) metaphysical
principle, there (abides) the nature of (all) the thirty-six principles.’


Abhinava comments on the first line in the ĪPVV I, p. 43-44 as follows:


‘AIl that is an object of perception (vedya) is like the body of the Self, which is
consciousness, the Light (that illumines the object), and one’s own essential nature.
Thus, just as the body, even though it is an object of perception, is pervaded by the
conscious nature because it is taken to be (the perceiver as the sense that) ‘this is me’
(aham iti) (directly) not secondarily, so is it with all things (viśva) (in relation to
universal consciousness). Even for those who consider the Self to be separate (from the

body), the secondary character of the sense of ‘' does not manifest in this world (of
daily life) within the body (as if it were separate from it), as does a blanket or the like
(which is known to be such) because (it serves) as an accessory (upakaraṇa) (to it).

Moreover, just as, in the manner which will be explained, consciousness is all things

because (everything) is pervaded by the conscious nature, so too we do not accept that

the mass of phenomena such ‘blue’ and ‘yellow’ is a (separate) category (vibhāga)

(apart from consciousness). (Utpaladeva) corroborates this (view) with a statement
drawn from a text of those who hold the view of (Advaita) Vedānta, (where it says,)
‘although (the Absolute (Brahman)) is (equally in each) place’. The space (contained in)

a jar and the space (occupied by a) cloth are (merely) conceived locations of space

(formed) by association with the jar etc. The nature of space, that is, (its) pervasiveness
etc. (ṛemains) such, and so (these conceived locations) are neither more nor less (than
space).

The Brahman, whose nature is the Light (of consciousness), is extensive

(bṛhat) and so is pervasive, and because it fills (bṛṁhaka) (everything), it nourishes the
emanation of all things. (Thus,) in the same way, these locations (in space), which are
the manifestations of blue and yellow created by secondary adjuncts such as (the colour)
blue made manifest by its own power, are (present) in the Brahman. (Now, the
Brahman) is ‘omniform’, and its condition is the undivided (unity) of all (its) energies.
As its nature is just the shining (of the Light of consciousness, which is universal
manifestation) alone, and thus because there it has no counter-correlate (which is other
than that,) there is no (second reality) which is to be negated (as not being the

Brahman). As this is so, (the Brahman is ‘inconceivable’, that is, it) is not associated
with the (dualistic) condition of thought constructs, and so is (pure consciousness)
which is devoid of them, the nature of which is the absence of (any) experience
(saṁvedana) of (anything) different (from itself) (pratiyogin). That which is every

single thing is ‘unsurpassed’, and is not even slightly something more than that (and

separate from it). (Thus, this statement) clarifies that the two (i.e. the Brahman and
individual manifeṣt phenomena) are mutually related to one another as the cause and
that which has that as its cause. IPVV 1, p. 43-44
Instead of tat pratyekam anatikrāntāḥ, tato manāg api anadhikāś ca read tat
pratyekam anatikrāntaṁ, tato manāg api anadhikañ ca. Cf. PTv p. 139, where
Abhinava seems to quote what could well be the continuation of the same dictum. ʻIt is
said in the scriptures (śāstra) that ‘although just (a specific) location, (such is) the

omniformity of Brahman, and although (present) in each particular reality level, (tattva)
it consists of (all) thirty-six reality levels.’ pradeśamātram api brāhmaṇaḥ sarvarāūpam
ekaikatrāpi ca tattve ṣaṭtrīṁśattattvamayatvaṁ śāstreṣu nirūpitam |

TANTRĀLOKA

knowledge. Thus, because there is no multiplicity of means, what diversity can
there be in the liberation which is its fruit?
Surely (one may ask, that by statements) such as: ‘And that
((knowledge), revealed (prathamāna)) through the means that is direct (as well

as (those that are) means to that (direct means) etc.))" it is explicitly said that

there are many means (to realisation); so why does that difference not entail a
difference in the goal? With this doubt in mind, he says:

malatacchaktividhvaṁsas tirobhūcyutimadhyataḥ |
hetubhede ‘pi no bhinno ghaṭadhvaṁsādivṛttivat I| 166 ||
Although the causes may be various, (the results, namely,) the

destruction, disappearance and removal of impurity (mala) and its power
are nonetheless one, just as (any inert object), such as a jar, can be

destroyed (in many ways)."

Even there, (in those cases) in which the relationship between cause and
effect is real, and even though the causes, for example, initiation and the like,

are various, there is no diversity at all in the result, namely, the destruction of
impurity and its power. This is because there is no (essential) difference in the
(resulting) initiation etc., even though (the means by which it takes place,) that
is, through the Forces (kalā), the Principles (tattva), the World-orders (bhuvana)
etc., are diverse.'" Similarly, ‘the destruction and disappearance’ of a jar is
the same even when the means to that, such as a mallet, a hand, a wall, (another)

jar and the like, are diverse. Thus, it is not invariably the case that there is a
difference in the result due to a difference in the cause. Again, (in the case)

where (one maintains that) the difference between the means and the goal is
only conceptual, this does not apply. This is the sense (of this verse). In this way
it is proved that, even though the means (to realisation) is of three kinds because
it is (the powers of) the will, knowledge and action, there is no difference at all

in (the form of) liberation which is its goal.
This is not only proved by discriminative reasoning (tarka), it is also

(proved) by the (testimony of) the scripture. Accordingly, he says:

2 Ṣee above, 1/142.
Read -vidhvaṁsas- for ~vidhvaṁsa- and bhinno for bhinnā, as suggested by Gnoli.

!0. These are the three Paths denoted (vācya) by Mantras along which the soul travels to

union with Śiva in the course of initiation. They run in parallel and include each other in
such a way that by going down any one of them, one travels down all of them. In an
earlier period, they probably served individually as Paths in this sense, and then came to
be integrated into a single six-fold Path (see above, note to TĀv ad 1/34 and below
6/30ab,34ab-35ab (6/30, 34-35) and notes). We do indeed find them separately.
Moreover, this may well be why there are different kinds of initiation (dīkṣā) according
to whether one travels the Path of the World-orders (bhuvanadī.kṣā), Principles
(tattvadīkṣā) or Forces (kalādīkṣā).


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

Definition of the Three Penetrations and Means to Realisation

=ṃmaT Tāikrāī gāāaṁzrṝā 1 z= 1
tad etat trividhatvaṁ hi śāstre śrīpūrvanāmani |
ādeśi parameśitrā samāveśavinirṇaye || 167 ||

This three-fold manner (of means to realisation) was taught by the
Supreme Lord in the scripture called Śrīpūrva (i.e. the Māliṇnīvijayottara) in
the course of explaining (the forms) of penetration (samāveśa) (into and by

the supreme state).


He quotes from that book:


SGIT
3 STIaY: JIISISATTĀTT: || ṞĒ¢ II

aṁq ũa fũrāa 1

3 TJTITTSĪIfd
JIT: āISTĪĒTTTT || ḶG I
S=-IRGTTATTGTĪRJTTJGĒGTÑ;:|
āJṬ vr̄̄Ta gHAI: #TTĪTT 3A | A90 ||
'! The word āveśa, which literally means ‘penetration’ or ‘entry, commonly denotes

the act of being possessed by supernatural beings who ‘penetrate’ and enter the body of
the person who is possessed. Possession generally has strongly negative connotations in

India, as elsewhere, but not always. From the earliest times, Vedic sources speak of
supernatural beings entering people’s bodies as powerful, energizing and enlightening
forces. The transformative experience of ‘penetration’ by Śiva’s energy is a

distinguishing feature of the teachings of all the Kaula traditions. Thus, we find other
similar classifications of forms of ‘penetration’ in the Tantras that teach Kaula practice.

Similarly, grace is experienced as a ‘descent of power’ (śaktipāta) that enlightens and

expands individual consciousness. The Siddhānta Āgamas normally do not associate the

two as Abhinava does, wishing thereby to integrate the praxis of the Siddhānta into his

Trika Kaulism. The point of contact is their common link with initiation. Initiation is
primariḷy understood to be a process of purification which, once it reaches completion,

allows the purified consciousness of the individual soul to conjoin, or even become one

with, Śiva consciousness. Purifying ‘penetrationsʼ are a cardinal feature of Kaula

initiation. Accordingly, the teacher checks that his disciple has been initiated by

observing a series of outer signs, beginning with the trembling of the body, to make sure

that it has taken place (see below, 5/102ab (5/101) ff.). Accordingly, the same terms are
used sometimes to name types and levels of initiation. As Abhinava tells us, his Trika

teacher Śambhunātha explained them to him as characterizing the categories of practice
(upāya) he now goes on to outline and then discuss in detail in the following four

chapters. For a discussion of the nature of ‘penetration’ and other divisions of its

varieties, and the scriptural precursors of the three main forms, see Dyczkowski 2009:
intro. vol. pp. 445 ff. For an extensive overview of possession in Asia, the reader is

referred to Smith 2009.

TANTRĀḶOKA

akiñciccintakasyaiva guruṇā pratibodhataḥ |
utpadyate ya āveśaḥ śāmbhavo ‘sāvudīritaḥ || 168 I|
uccārarahitaṁ vastu cetasaiva vicintayan |
yaṁ samāveśam āpnoti śāktaḥ so ‘ṭrābhidhīyate || 169 ||
uccārakaraṇadhyānavarṇasthānaprakalpanaiḥ |
yo bhavet sa samāveśaḥ samyag āṇava ucyate || 170 ||
The penetration (āveśa) that arises for one who does not think of

anything, by an intense (guruṇā) awakening (prabodhataḥ), is said to be

the one pertaining to Śiva (śāmbhava).
The penetration one attains whilst thinking of (the nature of) reality
(vastu) with the mind alone, without (having to practice) the utterance of

Mantra (uccāra) (or the like),” is here called Empowered (śākta).

The penetration that takes place by (the practice) of the utterance
(of Mantra and concentration on the movement of the breath) (uccāra), the

instruments (of Yoga) (karaṇa), visualization (dhyāna), (the cycling of )

'° This line also means ‘the penetration that arises for one due to an intense insight

brought about by the teacher (guruṇā)’. Thiīs is certainly the original intended sense,
which Abhinavagupta does not deny, but chooses to consider secondary with respect to

this one, and so I have translated accordingly. See below 1/172 ff.

'” This is the common meaning of the term ‘uccāra’. The literal meaning of the word

is ‘upward movement’, denoting, originally in a purely phonetic context, the upward
movement of the breath through the loci of articulation, striking which phonemes are

produced. In the context of the recitation of Mantra it denotes the upward flow of the
sonic energy of the Mantra. It is a fundamental practice of Śaiva Yoga and indeed that

of the early Tantras in general, including Vaiṣṇava and Buddhist. Another essential
dimension along with the sonic is prāṇic. The Mantra’s sonic energy rises through the
subtle body, sustained and energized by the flow of the vital breath that transports it. A
well-known representation of this process is the upward movement of Kuṇḍalinī, who is
at once the power of the vital breath (prāṇaśakti), speech (vācchakti), and consciousness

(cicchakti), reflecting an early Upaniṣadic triad of breath, speech and mind. Indeed,

‘uccāra’ may be understood entirely in terms of the vital breath. A passage in Chapter
Five below (verse v 43 ff.) describes how the upward movement of the vital breath
(without Mantra) ascends through progressively evolving levels of bliss, corresponding

to forms of the vital breath. In that context, one could, accordingly, translate ‘uccāra’ as

the ‘utterance or the upward movement of the vital breath’ (prāṇatattvasamuccāra).
Abhinava goes further by outlining an ‘uccāra’ of the ‘conscious nature’ (cidātman)

(ibid. v 62cd-74ab). Clearly this kind of upward movement is the most ‘internal’ of all.

Indeed, its exposition in Chapter Five that deals with the Individual Means can only be
understood if we take it to begin at that level, evolving rapidly into the highest level of
practice.

' Abhinava draws his definition of the instruments of Yoga from the Trisirobhairava,

which he quotes as follows below in Chapter Five. The reader is referred there for a
detailed explanation:

‘The instrument of Yoga (karaṇa) is practice based on awakened (individual)
consciousness (bodha). (The wise) say that it is of seven types, namely, 1) that of the
object of perception, 2) the perceiver, 3) consciousness (cir), 4) pervasion, 5)
abandonment, 6) inclusion, and 7) bringing together. (The practice of) ‘postureʼ is to be


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


phonemes (in the breath) (varṇa) (as the subtle practice of Mantra), and the

formation

of

supports

(sthānakalpanā)

(for

ritual

action

concentration)," is rightly said to be Individual (āṇava). (168-170)

and

The point of quoting (these verses) in the reverse order (with respect to
that in the Tantra) is that the means (to realisation) and the goal etc. lead to one

another, and so (they come) to rest predominantly in the Divine Means alone.!
He (now) explains that (triad of means, one after another,) in due order.

Śāmbhavopāya: The Penetration and Means Pertaining to Śiva
established in one’s own nature when (all things are) gathered together preceded by the
pervasion of that (consciousness).’ 5/128cd-130ab (129cd-131ab).

” Ṣee below 6/1-4ab.
. Liṭerally ‘pertain to the individual soul’ MV 2/23, 22 and 21. Abhinava takes care to

follow this scheme in the following chapters, which deal with these means to

realization. In his presentation of the means pertaining to Śiva (śāmbhavopāya), he

focuses on the state of the aspirant ‘who does not think of anything, which he
understands to be the dynamic condition of pure indeterminate (nirvikalpa) -T

consciousness. His exposition of the Empowered Means focuses on ‘conceiving reality
by the mind alone’. Accordingly, he deals with the dynamism of the mental world of

thought, that is, determinate (savikalpa) perceptions and their transformation into the
pure Śiva consciousness of the liberated state. Describing the practice of the Individual

Means, he deals, one after another, with what he understands to be the primary forms of
the practices listed here. These are based, initially at least, on the activity of the
psychophysical complex with which the individual soul is identified. Thus, they include

the most extensive part of most Tantric practice, namely ritual, and those derived from it

such as the repeated recitation of Mantra (iapa). Descriptions of rituals make up half the

Tantrāloka, that is, from Chapter Fifteen to almost the end. So all of that section may be
taken to be primariḷly concerned with the Individual Means, although, as we shall see,
Abhinava perceives that many of these rituals extend much beyond the domain of action

into the parallel ones of the higher means, as indeed they must if they are to be effective.

'!" Abhinava reverses the order of the verses in which the three means to realisation and

their corresponding states of penetration into Śiva consciousness are defined in the MV,

because he would like those who practice the teachings to attain the goal as soon as
possible. The higher means are more immediate than the lower ones and therefore more
effective and efficient. However, which one of them or combination of them operates at

a given time for a particular person depends on the intensity of Śiva’s grace. It is not a

matter of personal choice. Even so, as the ground of all the means to realisation, and the

reason why they can be effective, is the recognition of fundamental truths, teaching
them may open up one who learns them to receive the required help from the higher
levels not yet attained. Moreover, all means to realisation ultimately culminate in the

flash of insight that consciousness cannot be conditioned in any way, because there is
nothing outside it. Again practice, indeed perception itself, is only possible because it is
grounded in the reflective awareness of consciousness and sustained by it. This

reflective awareness necessarily operates in all the means to realisation, the purpose of
which is to strengthen and sustain it. The highest level of practice is centred solely on

this reflective awareness. The lower means simply remove the obstacles to it. Thus, in a

sense, all the means to realisation rest in the Divine Means, which culminates in No

Means.

' The exposition of the Divine Means extends from verse 171 to 213.

TANTRĀLOKA

Explanation of the Definition of the Śāimbhava Penetration

akiñciccintakasyeti vikaḷpānupayogitā |

tayā ca jhaṭiti jñeyasamāpattir nirūpyate || 171 ||

The expression ‘one who does not think of anything” (implies

that in this means) thought constructs are of no use. Thus, (as they are of
no use and do not arise,) the attainment of the object of realization

(jñeyasamāpatti) is said to be instantaneous.

‘Thus’ — because thought constructs are of no use. (What happens)

when one does make use of thought constructs is that at that very moment,

according to this view that: ‘he for whom the objective state of being is firm and
complete (pārṇa) in all respectsʼ (is taken up with thought and as a result is
fully identified with objectivity. Thus,) the object, (in the highest sense as) that

which must necessarily be known, that is, the ultimately real conscious

nature," cannot be attained (samāpatti).' (However, if) by the power of

practice, a thought construct (such as ‘I am Śiva, Who is all this’) gives rise to
another thought construct like itself, from which its lack of clarity etc. is
(progressively) falling away, then, in accord with the excellence of the thought

construct that is progressively produced, it approaches a state of identity with

Ṣee above, 1/168.
! Here there is a play on words that is difficult to translate. The word ‘jāeya’, which

literally means ‘that which should be known’, denotes the object of knowledge. Thus,

the word can refer to any object or objectivity in general as the object of knowledge. It

may also denote ‘that which must necessarily be known’, that is, Śiva, the ultimate

reality. See below, 1/176cd-178ab.

The term ‘samāpattī’, which I have for convenience translated in its non-technical

sense as ‘attainment’, denotes in the common nomenclature of Yoga the acquisition of a

level or state of contemplative absorption. Relevant dictionary definitions of samāpatti
include: ʻcoming together, meeting, encountering, falling into a state or condition,
getting (ie. attaining), assuming an original form, completion, and conclusion. In

Buddhist terminology, it is a subdivision of the fourth stage of abstract contemplation.’

Bhoja, in his commentary on the YSū, the Rājamārtaṇḍa, presents bhāvanā
(contemplation), samādhi (contemplative absorption) and samāpatti (attainment) as
three progressively higher stages of concentration and absorption in the object, the last

of which is a condition of identity with it (see Somadeva 2004: 221-2 for details).

Somadeva (2004: 221) writes: ‘bhāvanā, ‘contemplative insight’ is the most general

term uṣed in the context of meditation. It is the repeated mental engagement with an
object of contemplation to the exclusion of others. Samādhi, Bhoja explains, is a high
degree of bhāvanā. It takes place when awareness is narrowly focused, or ‘one pointed’.

Samāpatti, according to Bhoja, denotes the transformation of coalescence that takes
place in the mental continuum; consciousness assumes the form (tadrūpapariṇāma) of

whatever it is immersed in.”
!""! Read -jananakrameṇa for jananākrameṇa.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


consciousness which is essentially free of thought constructs.' (This is) as he

will say (in the passage) beginning with ‘He who wishes to enter (into this, the
Supreme Lord’s nature) must purify (his) thought (properly and) without delay
(añjasā), and ending with ‘thus (as a result of this process), consciousness

attains its own pure state of being which is free of thought constructs’.' Thus,

(the Divine Means) differs from the Empowered Means."

Surely (one may ask,) how can that be (the Divine Means) simply

because thought constructs are of no use (in that sphere of practice)? In order to
clarify this doubt, he says:

3TTTTṬGGTT JṬHTĒGTVIĪTGIT |I/92 |I
sā kathaṁ bhavatīty āha guruṇātigarīyasā |
jñeyābhimukhabodhena drākprarūḍhatvaśālinā || 172 ||

How does this (realization) take place? (This takes place,) says (the
Lord,) by means of that extremely intense (guruṇā) and awakened insight
(bodha) dīrected at the object of realisation (jñeya) that develops in an

instant.

!” Thought constructs are ‘unclear’ in this sense to the degree in which they are not

notions of the oneness of reality and its essential Śiva nature etc. As notions of this
oneness develop through repeatedly directing one’s reflective awareness and thoughts to

the teachings and applying them, they progressively become more in accord with the

true nature of reality. Thus, they become ‘clearer and their previous lack of clarity ‘falls
awayʼ. Progress is marked by the degree of excellence in these terms of thoughts and
notions. Ultimately, they dissipate, that is, dissolve away into pure Śiva consciousness

beyond thought and conception. Dissolving away thoughts into supreme consciousness
is, essentially, the practice of the Empowered Means.

ŚBeḻow, 4/2cd and 4/6cd.
” The cardinal difference between the Divine and the other two categories of means,

not just the Empowered, is that it operates in the state of consciousness which is free of
thought constructs. It pertains to the experiencing subject ‘who does not think of
anything’. Pure subjectivity is one that is free of the contamination of objectivity that
arises by the mistaken identification of the subject with the psychophysical organism.
The latter form of subjectivity is, in actual fact, a thought construct. The gradual
purification of that notion, as outlined here by Jayaratha and described in detail in


CHAPTER FOUR (VERSES 2 TO 6), IS THE DOMAIN OF THE EMPOWERED MEANS, WHICH FUNCTIONS
--------------------------------------------------

in the sphere of the means of knowledge, that is, the inner mental senses and the outer
ones through which cognitive consciousness operates. The Individual Means functions

in the sphere of objectivity that also includes the psychophysical organism as well as the
outer world. The difference between the Empowered and Individual Means is that the

former operates through the cognitive power of consciousness and so is internal. The

latter operates through the power of action exterally as well as internally.

'” The most evident meaning of MV 2/23 quoted above in 1/168 that Abhinava

comments on here is that the Śāmbhava penetration takes place in the disciple who is
free of thought when he is awakened by the teacher directly. Abhinava has chosen to see
a different meaning here, advancing a somewhat strained interpretation of this verse.
The reason for this is that he needs to find scriptural sanction for a feature of what he

TANTRĀLOKA

As ‘directed at’ (implies) towards (something), (the state of) ‘being
directed at depends (for it to be possible) on another entity (towards which it is
directed), and that is pure consciousness (cinmātra), because that is the most
appropriate (reality towards which awakened insight is directed). This is said
(implicitly when he says that it is) ‘directed at the object of realisation
(jñeya). In order to explain (how it is) ‘extremely intense’, he says that it
‘develops in an instant’. (By saying) ‘in an instant’, (he) indicates that the

kind of progressive development of thought constructs described (previously

that takes place in the Empowered Means) does not take place (in this one).

takes to be the most elevated practice of the Krama tradition, which he presents as the
inner culminating secret of Trika, despite its evident absence in the MV, his basic

authority (see above, 1/17). Krama strongly emphasises the importance of intense,
sudden, and ‘audacious' (sahasa) empowerment. Liberation is achieved by an intense,

instantaneous break with duality. Abhinava repeatedly asserts in various contexts that

this may take place in one who in some inscrutable way is fit to receive it, even without

a teacher. Thus, he stresses that personal insight that arises spontaneously (svataḥ) is
superior to one attained through a teacher or scripture, taking care to state they may lead

from one to the other and so sustain each other without contradiction. Again, it is
possible to be born a liberated soul or on the verge of becoming one. He is himself an
example (above 1/1). One may achieve the status of an enlightened teacher by oneself
(svayaṁsaṁsiddhika). This kind of teacher, Abhinava affirms, is the best of all (4/74cd-

76ab). Thus, initiation directly from the goddesses of consciousness is possible (see
below, 4/42cd-43ab), as it is by the progressive development of one’s own insight

(4/60cd-62ab and note), and along with that, the intensity (gurutaḥ) of one’s own efforts
(13/142cd-143ab). Again, the teacher may indeed occasion liberation, but for those who

are ṛeady, all that is required is his glance or touch. As we shall see, No Means is not
literally no means at all, it is an extremely subtle means that attains its goal effortlessly
in an instant. Jayaratha elaborates, telling us that it takes place in a number of ways, by

direct transfer of spiritual energy of the teacher into the disciple, especially by just a
look (below 2/2 and commentary). Abhinava himself confirms, from the disciples point

of view, that just by seeing a fully enlightened teacher, he is himself enlightened (2/40),
when he is ready and fit to be so.

' Śāmbhavopāya īs contrasted here with Śāktopāya, which is the means by which the

adept attains to the level of pure consciousness that is free of thought constructs through
a sequence (krama) of conceptual representations that make the object of realization

progressively clearer through repeated practice, as described above in 1/147-148 and

notes. `ḹ am all thisʼ is the clearest possible thought construct, which, in an instant turns
into its other aspect, namely, pure consciousness. This is total and complete knowledge,

that is, knowledge of all that exists. At this level of practice, the power of awareness
directed at Śiva, the object of realisation and all that needs be known, is so intense that it
reaches the fullness of complete insight and expansion of consciousness in an instant.
the

This is the highest practice, in which there is practically nothing to do. Thus,
PTLaghuvṛtti (p. 24) declares: tathāyaṁ parāmarśaḥ svīkartavyaḥ yathā

vicchedaśūnyaḥ sakr̥dvibhātasvabhāvo ‘kālakalitaḥ saṁpadyate

‘One should appropriate this reflective awareness in such a way that (that
eternal reality) that is unmeasured by time and its nature shines forth once (in an instant

and forever persists) without interruption.”

'This is Śaāmbhavopāya. According to Kṣemarāja, the first of the three sections
of the Sivasūtra is concemed with that. Thus, it deals with immediate and sudden


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Surely (one may ask,) how can these two (words i.e. guruṇā -- ‘intense’
and prabodhataḥ —‘awakened insight’), which have different case endings, be in

concord (sāmānādhikaraṇya)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

tṛtīyārthe tasi vyākhyā vā vaiyadhikaraṇyataḥ |
(The suffix) ‘tasi’ (at the end of the word ‘prabodhataḥ’), according
to this explanation (of the verse in the Mālinīvijayottaratantra), optionally
imparts (to the word to which it is suffixed) the sense of the instrumental
case. Otherwise, (the two words can also be understood) as not being in

concord. (173ab)

“(The suffix) ‘tasi’ (at the end of the word ‘prabodhataḥ’) imparts
(to the word to which it is suffixed) the sense of the instrumental case’. It is

applied after the indicatory (‘i’) is dropped. It is considered to ‘impart the

sense of the instrumental case’ by (adding it to) the end of the stem (of a word,

that is to that part of a word), which (may) end with any of the case endings.
(This grammatical usage may be considered to apply here). ‘Otherwise’, that is,
from a different point of view, ‘(the two words can also be understood) as not
being in concordʼ, in which case the meaning is ‘because of (tataḥ) an intense

insight (prabodha) brought about by the teacher (guruṇā)’.

realisation or awakening that takes place by an intense descent of the power of grace.

The rest of the Śivasūtra teaches a gradual path through the other two categories of

means to realisation. Commenting on ŚSū 1/5 udyamo bhairavaḥ `Bhairava is upsurge’
Kṣemarāja quotes MV 2/23, in which Śāmbhava penetration of consciousness
(samāveśa), which is Śāmbhavopāya, īs defined. He writes: ‘the upsurge (of
consciousness) is the sudden emergence of the highest level of intuition (pratibhā), the

outpouring (ucchalanā) of consciousness consisting of the (ever) extending awareness
(vimarśa) (it has of its own nature). It is Bhairava because he is full of the entire
universe, insofar as He is the unity (sāmarasya) of all His powers, and assimilates into

Himself every differentiated perception (kalpana). (He appears in this form) to those

(yogis) who, devoted to Him, are solely intent on the inner reality (of all things), in
order to make their own Bhairava nature manifest.’
The question is this ~ the word guruṇā (meaning ‘intense’) is in the instrumental

case. The word prahodhataḥ (meaning ‘awakened insight’) is an ablative, so how can

the former be considered to be an adjective of the latter?

Classes of adverbs and adjectives are formed by the addition of indeclinable

suffixes, especially to pronominal roots or stems. Functionally, there is no essential

difference between such suffixes and case-endings, and so adverbs and adjectives of this
sort may sometimes replace inflected nouns or adjectives. This one is formed by adding

the suffix taṣi. It is

standard usage in Pāṇini’s grammar to add indicatory letters to

suffixes and other constitutive elements of words, including roots themselves. These

serve to indicate certain grammatical functions of the verbal elements to which they are
atṭached, and so are elided when they are applied. Thus, tasi becomes as. The final ‘s

changes to viṣarga, i.e. ḥ, to make -tah. This suffix has an ablative sense, and is most
commonly part of an ablative construction. In this case, Abhinava says that it imparts

the sense of the instrumental case. Thus, when the suffix tasi is added to the nominal

TANTRĀLOKA

THJTGTTT āJTÇITTTSTTT |I 2
TRTTI TÑRITRJĀĪĀTIĪT;:|
āveśaś cāsvatantrasya ṣvatadrīūpanimajjanāt || 173 |I
paratadrūpatā śambhor ādyāc chaktyavibhāginaḥ |
And (the term) ‘penetration’ (āveśa) is that state (of identity) with
supreme (awakened consciousness) (paratadrūpatā) (that emerges) from
Śambhu, Whois undivided from (His own) power and precedes (all other
means to realization). (It takes place) by virtue of the submergence of that
(contracted) nature of the one who is not free (asvatantra), which is one’s

own (ṣvatadrūpatā). (173cd-174ab)

stem ‘prabodha-’ ʻawakened insight’, it means ‘by awakened insight’, and agrees with
‘intense (guruṇā), which is in the instrumental case and expresses a cause.

This translation conforms to Jayaratha’s interpretation, as it must for the translation

of his commentary to make sense, and moreover, seems to me to be basically correct.

Here we find the essential features of āveśa as understood by these Kashmiri teachers,
which clearly distinguishes its common, non-technical sense, i.e.

‘possession’.

According to Jayaratha, Abhinava contrasts two aspects of ‘that nature’ (tadrūpatā) of
‘one who is not free, namely, ‘own’s own’ (sva-tadrūpatā), which is in a contracted
state of consciousness, and that of the ‘the other? (para), whichis the:supremeʼ (paratadrūpatā), uncontracted consciousness of Śiva. In other words, the same consciousness
of ‘one who is not free’ has two aspects. One is contracted and is unique to each

individual soul. The other is that of the universal consciousness of Śiva who, in relation
to the contracted aspect, is ‘other’ and ‘supreme’. One is reminded here of Utpaladeva’s

standard definition of ignorance, that is, of the soul’s fundamental Impurity
(āṇavamala):

‘As it conceals one’s own nature, this is the soul’s (essential) Impurity

(āṇavamala). It is two-fold (as) the loss of the freedom of (its innate) consciousness and
s0 too (along with it), the lack of consciousness of (its innate) freedom.’ IP 3/2/4

(quoted above in TĀv ad 1/23)

When the individual soul is penetrated by Śiva’s power, which is His will
(icchāśakti) and freedom itself (svātantrya) that proceeds from Him, the former aspect

is ‘submerged', i.e. subordinated to the other aspect that, as a consequence, emerges and

becomes primary. Thus, the fundamental Impurity of ignorance is removed. The

resultant state is the original one which ‘precedes it’, namely, that of knowledge, which
characterizes the liberated condition whilst still alive, in which individual consciousness

persists but is subordinated to supreme Śiva consciousness, with respect to which it is
secondary. Accordingly, Jayaratha quotes Utpaladeva as saying that complete
penetration both ways (sam-āveśa) by Śivas power amount to that.
Wallis (2014 p. 299-300) prefers to disregard Jayaratha’s interpretation, and
sees a genitive rather than an ablative of the word śambhoh. So according to him, the
‘penetrationʼ is (the state) ‘of the Lord’. In order to do this, he somehow continues to
think of ‘śambhoḥ’ as an ablative in order to make ādyāt agree with it, translating it as
an adjective, i.e. as ‘primordial’ (Lord). At the same time, he makes it agree with
‘submersion’ (which he translates as ‘suppressing’). He is aware of this problem and so
offers two translations. This first, which he prefers, is:


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘The one who is not free (asvatantra) is the limited perceiver of the
insentient intellect and the rest (of the constituents of the psychophysical

organism with which it identifies). The ‘submergence’ of ‘that’ contracted
(conscious) nature ‘which is one’s ownʼ, that is, not common (to anybody
else’s), is (its) subordination (to the one supreme consciousness). ‘Penetration’
(āveśa) is ‘that state’ which is oneness with ‘supreme’ free awakened
consciousness (that takes place) having taken the support of that (submergence

of contracted subjectivity). This is the connected (prose order of the words of
this verse). As (Utpaladeva) has said (in the Īśvarapratyabhijñā):

‘The (cardinal) characteristic of (ibberating) knowledge is penetration by
its (power). (It is the assumption of) the primacy (mukhyatva) of the agency and
awakened consciousness of (the soul’s essential) conscious nature when the

void (of deep sleep) and the rest (of the constituents of the psychophysical
organism with which the contracted, fettered agency of the true subject is

identified, assume) a subordinate (state with respect to) that (agency of

awakened consciousness).

‘Āveśa [penetration] is that state which conforms itself (only) to the Supreme
((which initially appears) as ‘other’), due to a prior act of suppressing conformity to the
individual self (sva-), which lacks autonomy. It is (the state) of the primordial Lord,

united with his Power.”


The second interpretation, which he says ‘is not impossible’, is rendered thus:

‘Due to submergence that which has the quality of the self — (yet) lacks

autonomy — there comes about a state which has the quality of the Supreme: this is

āveśa (penetration) (which comes) from the primordial Lord, united with his power.

{P 3/2/12. Utpaladeva explains in his own brief commentary (vrrti) on this verse:

‘On the contrary, when this same void and the rest (of the constituents of the

psychophysical organism) are in a subordination state with respect to the awakened

consciousness which is the agency (of the Lord), then the characteristic of the
knowledge of the subject who, because of that, possesses the nature of that awakened
consciousness, is said to be the penetration of its power.” Clearly the basic, and certainly
original sense of ‘āveśa’ (literally ‘entry’) as ‘possession’, in the sense of ‘entry (which
is the literal meaning of the word) by some supernatural being, has been sublated by a

higher, ‘tamer’, more sophisticated understanding of it as liberating knowledge. Even

s0, the emphasis is clearly on the shift from the agency of the individual soul who is
‘penetrated’ to that of the agency of Śiva, who penetrates it along with His power. In
other words, as happens at the ‘primitive level, the supernatural being who possesses

takes control of the one who is possessed. When that being is Śiva, this means
identification with Him which ultimately came to be understood at an even more refined
level as ‘recognition’ on the part of Śiva Himself of His own nature as the individual

soul. Thus, in the very first verse of the Śivadṛṣṭi, Somānanda invokes Śiva to take
possession of him and thus reveal Himself to Himself in and through the teachings:
asmadrūpasamāviṣṭaḥ svātmanātmanivāraṇe |
Śivaḥ karoṭu nijayā namaḥ śaktyā tatātmane ||

‘May Śiva, who has penetrated (‘entered’ into and ‘taken possession of’) my

own nature, offer salutations by His own power to (His own) expanded Self in order to
reveal Himself by Himself (to Himself).”

TANTRĀLOKA

.Again, where has this (penetration of energy) come from? He says:

‘from Śambhu’, not from power (śakti) or the individual soul (aṇu).“ (He)
‘precedes (all other means to realization)ʼ, in the sense that power and the

indiviḍual ṣoul arise from that. Thus, here (in this case), power is that of the

will, not knowledge or action, because, as will be explained, these two are
contained within (this Śāmbhava) penetration.
Here the meaning of a sentence is understood by first understanding the
meaning of the words (padārtha) (that constitute it). Thus, after (explaining) the

application of the meaning of the words (padārtha), in order to (explain) the
application of the sense of the sentence, he says:

hIkEe.cē

fe-f+ fxez- zra, mīccrārataṁq|

aī frifṁṁ saa] 1| zu1

tenāyam atra vākyārtho vijñeyaṁ pronmiṣat svayam || 174||

vināpi niścayena drāk mātṛdarpaṇabimbiṭam |

mātāram adharīkurvat ṣvāṁ vibhūtiṁ pradarśayat |I 175 II
āste hṛdayanairmalyātiśaye tāratamyataḥ |
Thus, the meaning of this statement here is this: the object of

realization (vijñeya), unfolding by itself spontaneously, even without (any
intervening) intellection (niścaya), suddenly subordinating the (limited)

subject reflected in the mirror of the (supreme) subject (mātṛ), continuously
revealing its own glory (vibhūti), abides at increasingly higher levels

In other words, ‘possession’ is understood now at this higher level as a ‘descent
of powerʼ, thatis, grace. When the individual soulis penetrated by Lord Śiva’s power of
grace, everything changes. Before, the body, senses, mind and vital force seemed to be
its identity, and their corresponding states of consciousness, (waking of the body and

senses, dreaming of the mind and deep sleep of the vital breath), the only ones. When

Śiva’s divine energy of grace penetrates the individual soul, it realizes that the true
agent and perceiver is consciousness, whichis its own true essential nature, as it is that
of Śiva Himself. Then a dramatic reversal takes place, so that this becomes primary and
the body etc. secondary.
Thus, when consciousness is ‘submerged’ and ‘contracted’ (Sanderson would
say ‘inhibited’), the lower orders of subjectivity that identify with aspects of the
psychophysical organism emerge. In that condition, the uncontracted Śiva
consciousness is as if subordinate and secondary to contracted individual consciousness.
When the power of Śiva’s grace penetrates the individual soul, its contracted state
expands. As it does so, the lower orders of subjectivity ‘submerge’ and the higher orders
emerge correspondingly, until the supreme subjectivity emerges, which is the fully
expanded state of Śiva consciousness into which everything has been assimilated.

Ṭhe penetration that comes from Śiva is the basis of the two penetrations at the

following two levels, Empowered and Individual. The following two lead to the first,
which ‘precedes’ them.

' This line is missing in the citation of these two verses in VBh p. 19-20.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


(tāratamyataḥ) within the excellence of the purity (nairmalya) of the Heart
(of reflective awareness). (174cd-176ab)
‘The object of realization’ is the ultimately real nature, which is called
‘pure consciousness’ (cinmātra). The ‘(limited) subject’ is the intellect,
because it is the instrumental cause of the creation (prasava) of the entire

aggregate of the senses. That itself is ‘the mirror’, because it can bear the
projection of a shade consciousness (within itself). The limited subject that is
reflected there, that is, that has laid hold of itself (there), is subordinated, and the
projection of the Self into the intellect and the rest (of the psychophysical
organism with which it identifies) is rendered secondary (with respect to the
primacy of pure consciousness). In this way, (this) ‘gloryʼ, which is not
common to anything else, because its state is the most excellent of all

(taratamabhāva) as the conscious nature, is (thereby) being made primary.

(This process) is different (from the one which entails) the (progressive)

development of thought constructs in the manner described previously,'”
because it is not dependent on anything else, and so (takes place) instantly

(jhaṭiti). The Heart is reflective awareness (vimarśa), because it is taught

that: aṣ tthis (radiant effulgence of consciousness) is the essence (of all

manifestation), it is said to be the Heart of the Supreme Lord’. Its ‘purity

(nairmalya) is its (abiding) undecaying (nature), because it is not directed at

anything else (except the pure, eternal Light of consciousness)." 1ts
‘excellence’ is the supreme summit (of consciousness). ‘Unfolding’' there
‘spontaneously’, it shines as the self-illumining Light (of consciousness). This

is the meaning.

Surely (one may ask,) the object of knowledge (jñeya) may, in this

respect (tāvat), be of two kinds — sentient and insentient. There (in that case),

the insentient as (the experience of the colour) blue and the like penetrates into
Read with MSs Ch, J, Jh, T and Ḍ racayan for racayat.
2” Ṣee above, commentary to verse 171.
√ Consciousness spontaneously expands progressively because there are no
intervening thought constructs. This is both because their presence impedes i
development and also because removing and dissolving them back into consciousnes
a gradual process.

AII the MSs read visargaḥ — ‘emission’ — for vimarśaḥ.

TP 1/5/1ácd. IP 1/5/14 is quoted ad 3/209cd-210, ad 5/139-140 (138-139) and ad
29/126cd-127ab; ĪP 1/5/13-14 is quoted ad 4/181cd-182ab.

This ‘purity (nairmalya) is the property mirrors possess whereby they are capable

of reflecting images within themselves. The intellect (buddhi) possesses it to a limited

degree, and so it is like a mirror that inwardly reflects the inner light of the Self and
externally, the outer world that is presented to it through the channel of the senses. Here
it is said of consciousness itself, which is perfectly pure, because it reflects everything

within itself. Moreover, what is reflected is not different from it nor is the reflection
derived from anything outside it. Thus, the purity of consciousness is the state of pure
reflective awareness of its own nature. It is ‘not directed at anything else’

! The reflective awareness of pure divine consciousness is in a state of perpetual

expansion. It is always in the process of unfolding through all its energies, from the will

to knowledge through to action, and so encompasses all the means to realisation and is

their basis and essentially what they are.

TANTRĀLOKA

consciousness, so how is it that it is said that that ‘penetration is awakened
consciousness itself’? Thus, he says:

šraā fkṁ a7 f---Ġ ōīē, T kfāīq 1| 2.9
1|
ṢTq Taī Jcd ārḡNszāṁrzāT: |

TT : JTTI: Tā JTRJRTĪT; || Q9 |1|

aī fāh 1
jñeyaṁ dvidhā ca cinmātraṁ jaḍaṁ cādyaṁ ca kalpitam || 176 ||
itarat tu tathā satyaṁ tadvibhãgo ʻyam īdr̥śaḥ |
jadena yaḥ samāveśaḥ sa praticchandakākṛtiḥ || 177 II
caitanyena samāveśas tādātmyaṁ nāparaṁ kila |

Moreover, that which is to be known (jñeya) is of two kinds,

namely, (pure) consciousness alone (cinmātra) and the insentient (jaḍa).

And the first (kind) is conceived (kalpita) (to be Śiva for the purpose of

instruction and as an object of meditation and the like), while the other
(kind) is thus real (and true as it stands). Such is the distinction between
them.

(An outer) penetration (samāveśa) by an insentient (object pictured

in consciousness) is in the form of (unity-in-difference like an) image

reflected (in a mirror)." The (inner contemplative) penetration by (pure)

consciousness is (experienced as one’s own) identity with it. Indeed, it is

nothing else!" (176cd-178ab)

See above, note 1,1014.
Ṣee above, 1/72ab-73ab (1/72-73). I am following Jayaratha’s interpretation, as 1

must. However, it is clearly forced. A simple emendation of cādyaṁ (‘and the first’
(kind)) to cāntyaṁ (‘and the latter’) would make matters straight. Thus ‘the latter” is
‘the insentient’, that is, objectivity, which is indeed ‘conceivedʼ, that is, the object of

conceptualization. Thus, ‘the other” would be pure consciousness that is free of all
conceptualization and so is ‘real’ʼ and true — satyam — as it stands.

Read sa praticchandakākṛtiḥ for sapraticchandakākṛtiḥ.

Abhinava distinguishes between two kinds of ‘penetration’ (samāveśa) into
consciousness, according to whether what penetrates into consciousness is insentient or
consciousness itself, in order to clarify what he means by ‘penetration’. This is
essentially the attainment of oneness between the polarities that are penetrating each
other. This can only take place within the essential subjectivity of the individual soul,

which is consciousness with Śiva, Who is also consciousness.

Implicitly understanding, it seems, ‘jaḍa’ to mean not just ‘insentient’, but

some kind of supernatural being, Wallis sees in these two verses Abhinava’s refutation

of the commonly accepted meaning of samāveśa or āveśa as simply ‘possession’. Thus
he (Wallis 2014 p. 301) comments: ‘In a rather clever hermeneutical move, Abhinava
argues that there are only two ‘things’ that exist, objects and subject(s) — and possession

by an insentient object cannot mean anything but a reflection of the image of that object
in consciousness, (e.g. the mind obsessing over something), while possession by
awareness, which is one’s own innate being, can only mean oneness with it. In this
Advaita view, there is only one undifferentiated awareness that all sentient beings


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

Surely (one may ask,) how can consciousness, which is self-

luminous,' be an object of knowledge which is illumined by something else?

With this doubtin mind, he says that: ‘the first (kind)is conceived (kalpita)

(to be Śiva for the purpose of instruction and as an object of meditation

and the like)ʼ. (The word) ‘and’ indicates that thereis a doubt (as to how thisis

possible). The Supreme Lord Himself, out of His innate freedom, without

compromising
status as the knower, concealing (His) experience of Himself
(ahaṁpratīti), makes Himself known (pratipādayati) as an object of knowledge

for the purpose of instruction and meditation etc. as forms of reflective

awareness such as ‘one should know (vijāeya) that Śiva Himself is the agent of
all actionsʼ. This is indeed (the Lord’s) supreme freedom, namely, that even

though His own nature' continues to be the perceiver, He makes it manifest as

an object. Thus it is said to be ‘conceived’, that is, it is devoid of (an

independent) reality (vastuśūnya).'“ ‘The other (kind) is insentient like (the

experience of the colour) blue, and ‘is thus (real (and true as it stands))’ as an
object of knowledge. There (in that respect), the perception of (the colour) blue,
for example, is nothing but the act of reflection (within consciousness)

(pratibimbanamātra) as, for example, (the colour) blue, on the analogy of a
mirror and a face (reflected within it). (This act of reflection) is the purpose

of (this kind of) penetration (samāveśa) (of consciousness), certainly not

identity (with it). If that were to be so, ‘blue’ and the like, having become of the
nature of cognitive consciousness (jñāna), (all that) would remain is (that
cognitive) consciousness (jñāna)' alone, and so no distinct condition of a
participate in, thus possession is generally conceived as meaningless; there is no
separate being that can enter you.”

) Ṣee below, 2/9 and notes.
' R̥ead, as the MSs suggest, svaṁ rāpaṁ for svaṁ svarūpaṁ.

Thiṣ does not mean, of course, that Śiva does not exist, or that the way He is

conceived to be, for example, as a householder ascetic living on Mount Kailāsa, is false.

What is meant is that when we think of Deity, It becomes an object of our thought.

Consciousness is experienced as Deity, not through ignorance - it is not a

misconception — but because consciousness freely assumes that condition so that it can
be known and its true nature realised. In this sense, Deity is not a ‘vastu’, an
independent ‘existing thing’, which is one of the meanings of the word ‘vast’, or
‘reality°, which is another. Outer objects of knowledge are real as they are in the sense

that they really are objects of perception just as we see them to be. Deity is not really an
object. It freely manifests as such through the notions it generates in those who worship
and seek to attain it.

'“ AII pheṉomena that appear in any form, whether externally or internally in the mind,

do so within consciousness, like reflections in a mirror. But unlike a physical mirror,
which requires an outer object for its reflection to be produced within it, the mirror of

consciousness generates its own reflections. In this perspective, manifestation and

perception is understood to be the process whereby consciousness generates reflections.

It is the ‘act of reflection' of the mirror of consciousness. Abhinava expounds the
Doctrine of Reflection (pratibimbavāda) at length with supporting arguments in the first
part of Chapter Three.
There are several words for consciousness in the sources. Although they are
frequently interchangeable, the differing names may imply various aspects of
consciousness and the way it functions. These differences may at times be relevant to

TANTRĀLOKA

(corresponding) image (of the object within consciousness) (praticchanda)

would be (possible).“ (However,) it is in actual fact the case that the oneness

of contracted

(objectivised consciousness)

and

uncontracted

(cognitive)

consciousness is that of (consciousness itself). Thus, the purpose of (that kind

of) penetration (into consciousness)is oneness with it. So it was rightly said that
the penetration (of uncontracted Śiva consciousness into contracted individual
consciousness) is the (attainment) of that supreme nature (on the part of the

latter,) who is not free.

He concludes that (subject by saying):


[ÁáEEEIGZEIFĒ IEIEṄINĒḤIEET

tenāvikalpā saṁvittir bhāvanādyanapekṣiṇī |/ 178 II

Śivatādātmyamāpannā samāveśo ‘tra śāmbhavaḥ |

Thus, Śiva’s (śāmbhava) peṇetration is (a state of) consciousness

(saṁviṭti) free of thought constructs (avikalpā saṁvitti) that, independent of

meditation (bhāvanā) or the like, has attained a state of oneness with Śiva.

(178cd-179ab)

‘Consciousnessʼ, that is, (consciousness in its) uncontracted form.

Surely (one may ask,) agreed that here (in this case) the emergence (of

this uncontracted state of consciousness) does not depend on (the exercise of)

thought, for if that were to be the case, there would be no difference between

this (the Divine Means) and the Empowered Means, but (even so one may

the choice of one word as opposed to the others. For example, the word cit is a general

term for consciousness we find in all schools. The abstract noun derived from it —
caitanya — is understood to mean, more specifically, the ‘agency of the act of being

consciousʼ (citikartṛtā). Thisis how Kṣemarāja defines it in his commentary on the first

Śivasūtra. The term ‘ṣaṁvid’, which is also part of the nomenclature of idealist

Buddhism (yogācāra), denotes consciousness as dynamically engaged in the act of

perception. Accordingly, we come across the plural ‘many sarvids’ to denote the many

acts of perception (1ās tā vibhinnāḥ saṁvido niścayarūpāḥ ĪPV vol. 1 p. 356). The term
‘hodha’, although often used indiscriminately to mean just ‘consciousness’, like the

word ‘cit’, implies and sometimes explicitly means ‘awakened’, that is, ‘realised’
consciousness. In this case the term ‘jñāna’, which in a non-technical sense means
‘knowledge’, here denotes perception. Accordingly, I have translated the expression
‘nīlajñāna’, which literally means ‘the knowledge of blue’, as ‘the perception of blue’.

In this context, ‘jīāna’ means consciousness as the resultant cognition of an act of

perception. I translate the word accordingly as cognitive consciousness, not meaning the
actual act of perception itself (which it may also mean), but its result.

'" AII the MSs read pratikarmavyavasthaiva — distinct condition of a corresponding

response (within consciousness) for praticchandavyavastaiva — distinct condition of a
(corresponding)image (of the object within consciousness).

Read asarkucitarūpā for saṁkucitarpã.

“ The Divine Means is the exercise of the direct reflective awareness of pure,

unconditioned consciousness. This is called ‘saṁvitti’, the power of consciousness

(saṁvit). Practicing the Divine Means, individual consciousness penetrates into it and is


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


ask,) are thought constructs that (arise) at a subsequent time required here (to
maintain the expanded state of consciousness) or not? With this doubt in mind,

he says:

Conception and Nonconceptual Consciousness

TdTCṬṬT: TATTSṬT-TIS TāĪRHATI:


II Q198

tatprasādāt punaḥ paścādbhāvino ‘tra viniścayāḥ || 179 ||
santu tādātmyamāpannā na tu teṣām upāyatā |
The conceptions (viniścaya) that (arise) subsequently by the grace of
that (nondiscursive awareness) attain a state of identity (with Śiva,) and

(so) they serve no (further) purpose. (179cd-180ab)
'“By the word ‘that’ is (meant) reflective awareness free of thought

constructs. Siva’s nature is realised by consciousness that does not fashion

penetrated by it. In a timeless moment, individual contracted consciousness expands out
into the universal, uncontracted Śiva consciousness which is its ultimate ground and

essential nature. Unlike the Divine Means, whichis immediate and free of thought, the
Empowered Means is gradual, and involves working with thought constructs to ‘purify
them, that is, align thought with ultimate reality, as will be explained further ahead here

and in detail in Chapter Four.
Liṭeṟally: ‘they certainly do not possess the status of means’ na tu teṣām upāyatā.

Notice the distinction between the ‘means’ (upāya) to realisation, the corresponding
penetration, whichis what takes place, and the corresponding state to which it leads and
on which it is based. Thuṣ, for example, the Śāmbhava penetration takes place when
practicing Śāmbhavopāya, which resultsin the realisation of Śaāmbhavāvastha, thatis,

Śiva’s own state. Similarly, the Śākta penetration in Śāktopāya - the Empowered Means

— leads to Sāktāvasthā, which is the Empowered State, i.e. that of Śakti, whichis the
freedom and reflective awareness of Śiva consciousness. Āṇava penetration in
Āṇavopāya, that is, the Individual Means, leads to Āṇavāvasthā, that is, the Individual
State, i.e. the state of the individual soul, in which it realises its essential identity with
Śiva. All these are states of the one consciousness, and s0 basically the same

enlightened state viewed from these three aspects. This one universal and transcendental
consciousness is No Means (Anupāya). All the means to realization are, as it were,
rivers that flow into the ocean of No Means.
The Divine Means is the sudden penetration into Śiva consciousness, that is,
the complete and perfect expansion (pūrṇavikāsa) of consciousness by the recognition
of its essential fully expanded Śiva nature. It happens just by the force of Lord Śiva’s

intention alone, without outer supports. Thus, it is the experience of the same ineffable
reality recognized in No Means. The only difference is that No Means is once and
forever, whereas sooner or later, the yogi inevitably falls from the Divine Means if No

Means is not attained.

J, Jh, Ñ: + grhītamiti svaspaṣṭā nīścayasya yataḥ (N, T: yathā) prathā grṛhnāmīty

avikalpaikyabalāt tu (Jh, N, T: tuṁ) pratipadyate ‘The very clear experience (prathā) of
the ascertainment ‘(it) has been known’ takes place by virtue of the strength of oneness

with the nonconceptual (awareness that) ‘I know:.”

TANTRĀLOKA

thought constructs,' and so, as (further) means are unnecessary (karaṇāyogāt)

with regards to something that has been done (and completed) (kṛta), the
thought constructs that follow after have nothing (more) to do there (in that
case). Thuṣ, he says: ‘they serve no (further) purpose’.

'“Ṭhus, those who maintain that the validity of (knowledge) devoid of

thought constructs depends on thought constructs (to establish it) have been
refuted. Accordingly, he says:

vikalpāpekṣayā mānam avikalpam iti bruvan || 180 ||
pratyukta eva siddhaṁ hi vikalpenānugamyate |
He who says that (although) valid knowledge (māna) is not a
thought construct, (but) depends (nonetheless) on thought constructs (to

validate it)™ stands refuted indeed. (Only) that which has been

' MSs Ch, Jh, N, T and Ḍ read avikalpatayaiva (by consciousness) ‘free as it is of

thought constructs for avikalpakayaiva (by consciousness) ‘that does not fashion

thought constructsʼ.

In the following section, Abhinava establishes that consciousness must have two

aspects for even the most common perception - and with it, knowledge and experience

— to be possible. We have seen that in temporal terms they are said to follow on one
after another in each act of perception (see above, note 1,101). The first moment of
perception, its initial phase, is free of thought constructs. In this phase, consciousness is

a pure noetic continuum within which the object is perceived just as it is in reality, that
is, as a manifestation of consciousness appearing within it. To those that maintain that
no such initial phase of perception or form of consciousness devoid of thought

constructs which is known intrinsically to itself as it is exists, Abhinava replies that if it
were not to exist, perception, through which knowledge is acquired and formulated as

notions such as ‘this is a chair’, would be impossible. Moreover, by exercising reflective
awareness, it is possible to experience it directly and consciously. This is essentially
liberated consciousness, which expands perpetually, unrestricted by notions of time and
space, particulars, and relative distinctions etc. So if this ‘pure’ form of consciousness

were not to exist, not only could perception not take place, liberation would also be
impossible.

Buddhist logicians maintain that daily life (vyavahāra) is based on thought

constructs, as do some Śaivites such as Lolaṭa (see below, 1/228ab (1/228)). Concerning

his view, we read in the MVV:

‘Some say that the (sole) means of knowledge in this universe is inference
(read anumānaṁ pramānatvaṁ for anumānapramānatvaṁ), and that the Deity Whose

nature (is consciousness), free of thought constructs, is omniscient. Even although He is

the witness (of all things), He never becomes (a part of) the state of the daily commerce
of life (vyavahāra). (An opponent may object): how can the daily commerce of life,
which consists of thought (vikalpa), (take place in a reality which is) devoid of thought

constructs? (We reply that) all this commerce of daily life extends due to thought, and

that is (essentially) inference (not direct perception). (Indeed,) that itself is inference and
all the notions (associated with inference), the postulate (pakṣa) (for example, ‘there is

(previously)


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

correctly

determined

(siddha)

can

understood by means of thought.“ (180cd-181ab)

be

(subsequently)

fire on the hill’), (the ascertainment that the object possesses the distinguishing)

characteristic (of what is to be proved, for example, smoke,) and that there is an
invariable concomitance (between them, ‘wherever there is smoke there is fireʼ,) and the
perception of that, etc. In fact, there is only one validating perception (pratyaya). Surely
(one may ask in response to this view, which maintains that we never perceive anything
directly), how could inference be possible independently of direct perception
(adhyakṣa), as that is (invariably) associated with the uninterrupted connection
conditioned by the direct perception of that (which is the basis for inference)? (We reply
that,) that is true (it is not possible to perceive anything directly). However, the one
Deity Who is the seat of omniscience exists. Penetrated by Him, one can conceive
the
invariable concomitance (vyāpti) (between probans and probandum) within
consciousness. Otherwise, (if the Deity which is consciousness were not to exist,) the
perception (vedana) of fire and smoke etc., as well as the absence (of smoke when there
is no fire) etc., that is, concomitance in presence and absence, would not be possible
even in hundreds of aeons. Thus inference, which is the result of the similarity of
the

main perception (i.e. of smoke, for example, with its inferred cause), is said to be that

which impels the business of daily life (vyavahāra).
Everywhere (in all circumstances) these perceivers come to the Lord’s
consciousness to draw life from it, and subjectivity is none other (than that). People
are
ignorant. How can one attain the state of a knowing (perceiver)? Without
that
(consciousness, how could there be) subjectivity? Therefore, (each perceiver) is
conjoined within consciousness (to it), and so that (subjectivity) is not hard to attain. In
reality, (subjectivity, that is, the capacity to perceive and know,) is nothing (at all
in

itṣeḻf). It is the Lord of Consciousness who is such (i.e. the essential nature of
subjectivity). That view, which is based on the Lord’s direct perception, is (one of)

dependence (upon Him), and as (the consciousness of the individual soul) is dependent,
it is said to be the perception (māna) of a fettered soul. The ignorant soul is one who
is
without the Lord. Thus, the sage has proclaimed that, impelled by the Lord, he is subject
to pleasure and pain. Thus, the teacher Lolaṭa, who is respected by everybody,
has
taught that the one valid means of knowledge is inference, which depends in this way on

the Lord.' MVV 1/764cd-778ab.
Gnoli notes: ‘the reference here is both to the Buddhist logicians who maintain that
various activitess and manner of behaving [in daily life] (vyavahāra) are based on

discursive thought (vikalpa), and so too to those Śaiva teachers, like Lolaṭa, who were
influenced by them’ (cf. MVV 1/764cd-778ab). See below, 1/228ab (1/228).
Dualist (Vaibhāṣika) Buddhiṣts and dualist Śaivites maintain that the state of
consciousness devoid of thought constructs (nirvikalpa), in which the nature of an
object is ascertained, arises at the end of a series of thought constructs (vikalpa)
concerning its nature. For example, the thought “what is this?” is followed by a series of

notions that conclude with the knowledge that ‘“this is a jar, which arises in a state of

consciousness free of thought constructs (nirvikalpa). Abhinava refutes this view. As

the idealist Yogācāra Buddhiṣts also maintain, he affirms that a state of consciousness
free of thought constructs (nirvikalpa) occurs at the beginning of the process of
cogitation. The true nature of the object shines in the pure consciousness free of thought
constructs at the initial moment of perception as the radiant manifestation of
consciousness. Thought constructs, which define it conceptually as a specific entity,
rather than as a generic manifestation of consciousness at one with it as all things
are,

can only function after the nature of the object has been correctly established to be such

(siddha). This first moment is experienced at the supreme level of practice
(śāmbhavopāya), which is the means to realisation that attains its goal directly in a flash

TANTRĀLOKA

Indeed, a means of knowledge (is defined as having) as its object an
entity not (as yet) known. As they say:
‘A means of knowledge (is defined as having) as its object (an entity)
not (as yet) known, or (to put it another way,) it is the (cognitive) light (that

illumines) something that is unknown.

(If one maintains that) an entity that has been perceived (directly by

consciousness) devoid of thought constructs is (subsequently) determined

(according to its specific nature) by thought which follows after, then, as

(thought would in that case function as) the perceiver of what has (already) been

perceived, then it has no validity in itself. So how can it come to serve as an
instrumental means (nimitta) to impart the status of a means of knowledge to
something else also (i.e. the preceding nonconceptual perception)? Thus, he
says: ‘only that which has been (previously) correctly determined (siddha)

can be (subsequently) understood by means of thought’. ‘Correctly
determined’ means ‘come to be known’ (adhigata). ‘Understood’
(anugamyate) means that it is ‘known’ (gamyate, i.e. adhigamyate) ‘after

(anu). This is the meaning.

Śurely, (an opponent may object: alright,) let determinate representation
(vikalpa) operate with respect to an entity that has been perceived; nevertheless,
there (in that case) it would not be logical (to maintain that) its condition is that

of a perceiver (grāhakatva) because it is (already) a determinate apprehension
(adhyavasāya) by (its very) nature. So how could the ascertainment (pratipatti)
(in the form) ‘ perceive what has been perceived’ be that of (thought)? With

this doubt in mind, he says:

gēraī fkzzāīzā aā aāT7 || 2¢2 11

gr̥hītam iti suṣpaṣṭā niścayasya yataḥ prathā l| 181 I|
gr̥hnāmīty avikalpaikyabalāt tu pratipadyate |

of intuitive insight free of thought constructs. The other means which operate in the
domain of the thought constructs of the second moment are slow and indirect, and are
anyway only effective because they are rooted in this pure consciousness.

This line is also quoted above ad 1/54 (see note there) and below in TĀy ad 4/81cd-

A means of knowledge, to be such, must be a source of knowledge. Knowledge to

be knowledge must be new. If one does not come to know something that was not

known already, it would be recollection, not knowledge. Thus, for a means of
knowledge to truly be a means of knowledge, it must have as its object something new,
not previously known which, like light, it illumines. See below, TĀ 4/81cd-85 and

commentary.

Jayaratha explains that Abhinava is refuting those who argue that the existence of

nondiscursive (i.e. thought free) awareness is proved on the basis of the existence of
ideational, discursive awareness, since an idea is a thought construct restricted to an
‘understanding of what has already been determined. Thus, pure consciousness can

never be an object of proof by extraneous means as it is self-iluminating and never an

object of knowledge.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

Insofar as the experience (prathā) of the ascertainment (niścaya)

‘(this) has been perceivedʼ is clearly evident, one knows (pratipadyate) that

“I perceive”° by the power of oneness with thought-free consciousness

(avikalpa). (181cd-182ab)

This verse appears at first sight to be saying that determinate perception takes place

first and that it is subsequently appropriated by the perceiving subjectivity which is

indeterminate. It thus follows the order we find in the Sāṁkhya’s theory of perception,
which SN. Dasgupta (1979: 261-62) outlines as follows: ‘the first is the buddhi stage,

which has only the mere objective determination (niscaya); the second is the stage of

asmitā or abhimāna, the ego, which feels all things as belonging to the self as “ am so
and s0”, “mine is this or that”.” However, the Śaiva view here is that this
self-appropriation of a perception is not just a function of the ego (ahaṅkāra), which is
a mental organ and so does not intrinsically involve consciousness, which merely
paṣsively illumines its functioning. The view here, on the contrary, is that perceptions

are in this way appropriated by consciousness itself, mediated by its intrinsic
subjectivity operating in the restricted ambit of the personal ego sense.

The first systematic extensive inquiry into the nature of ‘thought’ — vikalpa — framed

in this term — developed in the ambit of Buddhist idealism, the Yogācāra, who presented

the teachings of the Buddha recorded in his sayings (nidhāna) in this perspective.

Yogācāra distinguishes between two phases of perception. The first is direct perception
(pratyakṣa), that is, experience (anubhava), and the second its conceptualization. The

firstis free of thought - avikalpa, and the second is thought itself— vikalpa. Thus, in the

following passage from the PTv, Abhinava refers to, as similar to his own, the Yogācāra

concept of the ‘store-house consciousnessʼ (ālayavijñāna) as the depository of thoughts
and associated Karma of the past and seeds of those that will mature in the future. Thus,
according to the Yogācāra, the world we perceive is a mere mental construct, as unreal

as is a dream. Here the nondualist Śaiva view differs radically, insofar as it understands
it to be a manifestation of consciousness that appears within consciousness. Knowing it

to be such is to know what it is. Thus, the world of thought constructs is not just
phenomenally real, it is absolutely so, as a manifestation of consciousness conceptually

conceived and known by the light of nonconceptual consciousness, which is its source
and foundation. Abhinava describes this process as follows:
‘Although this reality (artha) is solely the self-luminous light (of consciousness
and so is self-evident), it will now be explained by means of reasoned argument (yukti).
Differentiated conceptual representations (vikalpa) of the (colour) ‘blue’ and the like are

conceived

in

succession

and

are

considered

to

exclude

one

another

(virodhāvabhāsasiṣaṁmata). They are veridical (as manifestations of consciousness)
and (so) are not in the process of being destroyed (niḥṅśeṣyamāna) (as are errors in the
course of correction). (t is clear that they are real and correct,) because they are fit at
(some) subsequent time (to actualize their) functional efficacy and the like born from
their own intrinsic power (svasāmarthya). The (undifferentiated) nonconceptual
conscious (nirvikalpasaṁvid) nature precedes the conceptual representations (vikalpa)
established (in phenomenal manifestations such as the colour) blue and the like, that are
progressively (in the process of) being conceived. (Even s0,) it is not separate from the
manifestations (of phenomena) such as (the colours) blue and yellow, which are
considered to exclude one another, and are to be conceived in this and that (form,) as is
the case, for example, with the perception (hodha) of a cognition which has as its object
a picture, the perception (of a landscape viewed) by one standing on the peak of a
in, or the eyes of a peacockʼs feathers. Whereas (that form of perception,) which
ded up into the manifestations (of individual phenomena) such as (the colours)

TANTRĀLOKA

blue and yellow, the nature of which are contrary to it, is not preceded by the

(differentiated) conceptual representations (vikalpa) of the manifestations of, for
example, (the colours) blue and yellow, which have arisen as each of (the specific forms
of its) own endless power (samārthya) (to do countless things), as happens with the

direct perception of the colour blue alone.

And thīs (consciousness) that is free of thought constructs (nirvikalpaka)
exists. It is variously called in the scriptures, ‘creative intuition’ (pratibhā), ‘opening
upʼ (unmeṣa) and so on, and is present in the interval between both (of the two

differentiated) conceptual representations (vikalpa), namely, one which has ceased and
the other in the process of arising. It precedes, (in so far as it is such,) the

(differentiated) conceptual representations of (the colour) blue and the like, that are not
erroneous and considered to be mutually exclusive. Therefore, (that consciousness, free
from thought constructs,) consists of the undivided (unity) of (its) endless
manifestations (and is not separate from them). (The existence of this) interval between

both cognitions cannot be denied, because the two forms of cognition are divided (off
from one another). Moreover, the nature (of that interval must be) consciousness itself,
otherwise, (if it were to be), as they are, (discontinuous) when the latent impression (of a
past) perception (saṁvtsaṁsṣkāra) ceases, recollection, etc. (of the past) and the
association (of one thing with another) (anusaṁdhāna) and the like (in the present)

would not be possible. Thus, there is a general consensus of opinion amongst all

philosophers (with regard to the object of our discussion,) namely, creative intuition
(pratibhā) that possesses (these) attributes. Thus, it is not (something that is) not well
established (nāsiddhiḥ). Moreover, the condition of this (reflective awareness) is not
conceptual, because it does not depend on convention (saritketa) (as does language,

which is necessary for the formation of thought constructs, prior to the) proficiency (to

form it) (vyutpatti) and (specific) time (and circumstance for it to arise). (Indeed,) it
does not differ from the nature of consciousness, which is the opposite of the insentient,

and is (inseparably) linked with this type of reflective awareness, which is (spontaneous

and) innate (sahaja) and not conventional (as is the language of thought). It is not
comparable to conceptual representations (vikalpa), because no relative distinctions
arise (within it or with respect to consciousness). However, it is the support of the
essence (of all forms of) relative distinctions (bheda) it may generate (objectivity
characterized as) ‘meaning and things’ (arthabhāva) (cf. VP 1/1).

Conceptual representations (vikalpa) do not arise without (the support of the

reflective awareness of consciousness that is) free of them (avikalpa) because they are
not independent (and free). (Their) lack of independence is because they are (necessarily
mediated by) the recollection of the linguistic convention etc. (required for the mental
verbalization that the formation of thought constructs involves). How is it (possible) to
recollect a linguistic convention and the rest without (some prior) direct experience?
Again, in accord with the aforestated principle, consciousness is devoid of any temporal

and other such limitations. Thus, this Supreme Goddess, creative intuition (pratibhā), is
just one (alone) who, conceived through the glorious power of our (forms of) language,

possesses a limited nature of this sort but, even so, is made of all things. In the centre
also, (she is) the plane of birth of (all) the other thought constructs, present, past and
future. In the same way, for the same (reasons, Buddhists,) skilful in (the practice of)
discernment, accept (the existence of) a store-house consciousness. . . . This creative
intuition (pratibhā) which is the consciousness of all objects (of perception) present
within the interval between (the two cognitions) which precede and follow after, is of

the nature of all things. What can the lassitude (glāni) fashioned by the bondage of non-

existence do to one whose nature has dissolved away within it and (thus) shines with the
supreme power?’” PTv 104-109


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘The experience (prathā) ‘(this) has been perceived” arises because
of the existence of the (corresponding) thought construct as it operates when an

entity has been perceived (and its nature conceptually ascertained). Whereas
‘one knows (pratipadyate) that ‘] perceive’ by virtue of taking one’s support
from

the

oneness

with

thought-free

(consciousness)

(nirvikalpaka),

by

identification of the entity (artha) which is the object of perception (dṛsya) with

(its) mental representation (vikalpya) (when the perception is subjectivized).N

So it is said with good reason (yukta) that: ‘thought grasps what has (already)
been perceived.”
Surely (one may ask,) cognitive consciousness (jñāna) gives rise to
knowledge, not action. Thus (the bare existence of) an entity is known by that.
(Its specific nature) is not correctly determined (siddha) (by cognitive
consciousness alone). So how is it that it was said that ‘that which has been
(previously) correctly determined (siddha) can be (subsequently) understood by

means of thought’?' With this doubt in mind, he says:

avikalpātmasaṁvittau yā sphurattaiva vastunaḥ || 182 1|
sā siddhir na vikalpāt tu vastvapekṣāvivarjitāt |
The correct determination (siddhi) of (the nature of) an entity is
(essentially) its radiant appearing (sphurattā) within consciousness that is
free of thought constructs. It is not the result of a thought construct,
because (thought) is independent of (that) entity. (182cd-183ab)
According to (our) doctrine of (the universal) manifestation

(of

consciousness) (āhhāsavāda), it īs said" that the (fact and) act of
manifestation (ābhāsamānatā) itself is the correct determination (siddhi) (of an

entity’s nature,) and so it is ‘(essentially) the radiant appearing (sphurattā) of
an entity (within consciousness)’. (But) surely (one may ask,) as thought
constructs are also within themselves (essentially) thought-free (consciousness),

they

too

have

a

radiantly

apparent

form

(sphuradrūpatā)

(within

consciousness), and so why should not (the nature) of an entity be correctly
determined from that also? With this doubt in mind, he says: ‘it is not the

result of a thought construct’. In accord with the dictum: ‘all thought is

recollection," the nature of thought constructs is to that degree (tāvar)
memory, and that operates with respect to an entity previously experienced that

The recognition of this fundamental condition of consciousness free of thought

constructs is the essence of the practice of the Divine Means.

!5 See above, note to 1/37-38ab. Gnoli notes that ‘the distinction between the object of

perception and that of its mental representation is at the theoretical, not practical level.
Concerning this notion, see the PV of Dharmakīrti Svavrtti, 70 (Gnoli 1960, p. 39).

" Above, 1/180cd (1/181ab).
!5 ṞṚead ity ukte for ity uktaṁ.
“ AIṣo quoted above, ad 1/88-89ab (89-90ab).

TANTRĀLOKA

is not present. Thus, thought constructs are independent of (any external) entity

(vastu). Although independent thought constructs and the like are linked to

things fashioned by the embodied perceiver (kṣetrajña), even so, those things
(artha) are born of the latent traces of previous experience, and thus it is said
that: “(thought) is independent of (that) entity’. The point is, how can that
which is not dependent (and so is unrelated to any external entity) become a

means to its correct determination (siddhi)?"

If in this way, thought operates with respect to an entity that has been

determined by thought-free (consciousness), it does nothing more at all (that

needs to be done), so how is it required anywhere (in any circumstance to
determine) ‘what is that’? Thus (in response to this question) he says:

g¢2 1

Jayaratha explains that all ideas are essentially memory (sarvo vikalpaḥ smṛtiḥ). The

discursive awareness of thought has nothing directly to do with the object in itself that
exists at the present moment. Although an object does appear within consciousness, the

mental representation ‘this is a jar’ is not the jar. The determinate perception that this
object is called a jar is based on the previous experience of having seen such objects
and, recognizing its similarity with them, the conventional name ‘jar is then mentally
assigned to it. The nondiscursive, reflective awareness that ‘I perceive something’
invariably precedes this mental representation and is thus the immediate experience
around which subsequent thought constructs cluster. Thought constructs do not and
cannot establish (i.e. prove and determine) the existence of the object.
Moreover, as Abhinava argues in the following passage, conceptualization

alone is not sufficient to explain, as Buddhist idealists maintain, how we experience and
know anything. If thought is just recollection with no subject who thinks, many
problems would arise. For example, it would not be possible to establish a distinction

between present and past experience.

‘And that ascertainment (of the nature of an entity) which is the negation
(apohana) (of all else that it is not,) although it is all subsequent to the time of (its
direct) experience, even so manifests as one with its (immediate direct) experience by
ignoring (apahastana) that subtle difference in time, so that the experience is also
associated with (its) object (artha) such that (it accounts for the) notion (abhimāna) that
“I am experiencing this now”. Otherwise, (if that were not so, then we would have to
accept that) ‘all thought (vikalpa) is recollection’. If one were to consider that that is in

fact so, then when an experience is taking place and the experience which is that to be

ascertained (sādhya) is not firmly in place, how could the reflective awareness of that as
having been established be possible such that “I experienced (this in the past)?” Nor (is
it the case that) the difference in the time is a mistake (that occurs) when no reflection
on temporal distinction takes place, because temporal distinction is not (objectively) real
(avāṣṭava). We say that the real nature of a thing is as is the reflective awareness (of it).
Thus, the venerable (bhaṭṟa) (Buddhist idealist) Śaṅkarānanda says ‘thought constructs
induce experienceʼ, in order to criticize Dharmottara (who says) ‘therefore an entity

(vastu) (the true nature of which) has been established cannot be described thus (just as

it is).” (The word) ‘thus’ (in this statement) indicates that the notion is a product of the
mind (manas), which is outside one’s own (immediate) experience. The (Buddhist) who
maintains (the view that reality) is a stream of self-illuminating awareness is incapable

of establishing that there is a separate independent condition that is continuously giving
rise to ongoing experience. Hanging onto a blade of grass by (maintaining) this (view),
he needs help. So let this suffice.’ IPVv vol. 2 p. 16.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


ftcaṝ- |
kevalaṁ saṁvidaḥ so ʻyaṁ nairmalyetaravibhramaḥ || 183 |I
yad vikalpānapekṣatvasāpekṣatve nijātmani |
The fact that consciousness is independent within itself of thought
constructs (and perceives the nature of things directly reflected within itself
or else) depends upon them (in order to discern its objects as specific
particulars differentiated from others and itself) is only this movement to

and fro (vibhrama) (between its) state of purity (nairmalya) and its
opposite. (183cd-184ab)

In this way, exponents of all views have established that in the course of
the business of daily life (vyavahāra) etc., consciousness is dependent on
discursive ideation (vikalpa). In order to clarify (that) once (that dependence) is
abandoned, (consciousness) is (realised to be essentially) independent of

discursive ideation,'" he gives an example:

niśīthe ‘pi maṇijñānī vidyutkālapradarśitān || 184 ||
tāṁs tān viśeṣāṁś cinute ratnānāṁ bhīūyasām api |
(In fact consciousness always discerns its object directly,
independently of thought constructs, just as a skilled jeweller) who knows
jewels," even in the dead of night, discerns the particular qualities of even

“ n the next two verses, Abhinava explains what he means by the ‘purity’ or mirror-

like ‘translucency” of the aspect of consciousness that is free of thought constructs.

“] variously translate ‘vikaḹpa’, according to the context, as ‘thought’, ‘notion’, ‘idea’,
‘ideationʼ, ‘discursive ideation’, and ‘determinate representation.
“ Ṣee below, 1/229ab (1/229cd), where what is meant by ‘a skilled jeweller’

(conversely, cf. the expression ratnatattvam avidvān in 1/228a). The jewel, we are told

below, is the pure Self (4/111cd-113ab). Abhinava is referring here to the intuitive
foundation of perception which, free of thought constructs, perceives the nature of its

object directly. Not only is this pure cognitive consciousness the epistemic foundation

of all empirical knowledge; it is also the manner in which the Divine Means
(sśāmbhavopāya) operates. The expert jeweller recognizes the value of a gem in an
instant (cf. 4/239). Similarly, the practitioner in the Śāmbhava state perceives the true

nature of things as manifestations of consciousness, that is, as the effulgence (sphurattā)

of his essential Śiva nature, in the flash of the initial moment of perception. If the
jeweller is less skilled, he cannot manage to know the value ofa gem just at a glance; he

needs time to look at each gem carefully, and must think for some time in order to

aṣsess its value. Thus, he is cast into the sphere of thought, like one who practices in
Śāktopāya. There thought is gradually purified until it merges in the state of certainty

TANTRĀLOKA

a large number of gems that are illuminated (for just the very short) span

of time of a lightning flash." (Similarly, the man of knowledge grasps the

nature of the object in the flash of pure awareness that precedes the
formation of thought constructs, as one with his own conscious nature).
(184cd-185ab)
A (skilled) jeweller comes to know, by virtue (of his) superior (and

abundant) experience, the very subtle, mutually distinguishing features ‘of even
a large number of gems’, even in a limited (amount of) light that lasts a short

time, without (having to) determine (them) (avasāya). 1t is because of this that
he possesses (the capacity to) discern (viveka) that “his (gem) has little (value),

this one a lot, and this (other) gem (compared to) that one also is very valuable
(mahadratna).”

free of thought, when it reaches the highest degree of clarity (see 1/229ab-229cd
(1/229cd-230ab)).

'“ The same example is given by Bhartṛhari, the philosopher of language, in his
Vākyapādīya (1/35). There it serves to illustrate how the pratibhā which is the capacity

to understand language, operates by grasping meaning in an instant, without intervening

ratiocination. Thus, those who know a language well can grasp the meaning of a word
or statement in an instant, whereas others require practice to do so. If we are right to

identify Bhūtirājatanaya (the ‘son of Bhūtirāja), to whom Abhinava refers as one of his
teachers (37/61ab (37/60)), as Helārāja who wrote an important commentary on it,

Abhinava may have studied it with him. Whether this is correct or not, it is remains

possible that his lost ‘Prakīraṇakavivaraṇa’ may have been a commentary (vivaraṇa)
on parts of the third chapter of Bhartṛhari’s Vākyapadīya that goes by that name (Gnoli
1999: intro. p. 78). A variant of this verse is found in the MVV (1/179). There instead of
niśīte pi maṇijñānī “(a skilled jeweller,) who knows jewels even in the dead of night’ ,
the reading is ramatattvasphuṭaprajño ‘one who has a clear (and well-developed)

knowledge of the true nature of gems’.

As is the case in Abhinava’s works on Trika prior to the Tantrāloka, there is no
reference in the MVV to SŚāmbhavopāya. Even so, the state was well known to him.
There this verse, along with two that follow, serve to illustrate with examples how Śiva
can be realised in an instant by those who, well-practiced, can know ultimate reality

spontaneously in an instant. He writes:

‘A person who (is) at one (with the music) (tanmaya) experiences the beauty
(vaicitrya) in a large number of notes applied by a dexterous touch (arranged) in a single
extension (of musical sound) on the vīṇa. One whose sense of hearing has reached the
highest limit through (rigorous) training, tranquil (without effort), knows the notes of

that (melody) and (can) even (judge) whether the microtones are lower of higher. May

this suffice! In this doctrine of nonduality this (etad) is established without effort: even

when duality appears, reality is nondual.” 180-182.
Even in a system that rests entirely on duality (like Patañjali’s Yoga), this is

clearly established. Patañjali, for instance, states in the chapter with the name ‘magic

power that ‘everything is also known by intuitive knowledge’. And it is also stated by

me in this work (atra) that in the first opening of intuition (which is consciousness
itself) and undivided, there is (sthita) an appearance (udaya) of the fruits of all
perfection in the form of a vibrant emergence (sphurattā) of everything. MVV 1/183-

185ab Partly Hannederʼs translation.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


What is the reason (nimitta) here for the superiority of his experience,
by virtue of which he can determine the nature of an entity, even independently
of thought? (In response to this question,) he says:

īĩcā tṁrē árzaraazīmezī 1| q¢., ||

nairmalyaṁ saṁvidaś cedaṁ pūrvābhyāsavaśād atho || 185 ||
aniyantreśvarecchāta ity etac carcayiṣyate |
Now, as we shall explain later, (the ability to discern) this purity

of consciousness (nairmalya) (which precedes and is the basis of all
thought that apparently sullies this purity) is achieved by previous practice,
or likewise, by the Lord’s unrestricted will. (I85cd-186ab)
(By) ‘previous practice’ (is meant practice) in another (past) life. Thus

‘we shall explain later,’ for example in Chapter Thirteen (in the context of the
teaching concerning the descent of the power of Śiva’s grace — śaktipāta).
This penetration is not only of three kinds, insofar as there are also
other, secondary kinds. Thus, he says:

Varieties of Gradations and the Trika Triad

TGJTJfR̥̄ṬTT

eE.

S

pañcāśadvidhatā cāsya samāveśasya varṇitā || 186 ||
tattvaṣaṭtriṁśakaitatsthasphuṭabhedābhiṣandhitaḥ |
Fifty

varieties

of

this

penetration

are

described

(in

the

Maālinīvijayottara-tantra) īn accord with (how) these (three) clearly apparent
categories (bheda), located amongst the thirty-six metaphysical principles

(tattva), are discerned (and conjoined together) (abhisandhitaḥ). (186cd187ab)
!“ R̥ead atha for atho at the end of the line.

'“ The point is that the one Śāmbhava penetration includes the Empowered and

Individual. Thus, the Divine Means includes the other two categories of means and so

‘precedesʼ them as their basis.
'“ Verses 1/186cd-196 are essentially a commentary on MV 2/17-19, quoted by
Jayaratha here. The series of penetrations are meant for yogis who penetrate the fifty

realities listed below in a progressive upwards ascent, by contemplating, conjoining and
absorbing them one by one into their subjective consciousness to finally penetrate into
and be penetrated by pure Śiva consciousness. The more advanced yogi may also reach

TANTRĀLOKA

(The fifty varieties of penetration are) ‘described’ in the Śrīpūrvaśāstra
(i.e. the Māliṇīvijayottaratantra). As is said there:
‘O fair faced lady, penetration by Rudra’s power is described
(paripathyate)" as being of five kinds. (These are the penetrations) of 1) the
gross elements, 2) the metaphysical principles, 3) the Self, 4) Mantra, and 5) the

power of the Lord.'" The one called elemental is here of five kinds and the
next one thirty. The one called the Self is said to be of three kinds, and the one
called Mantra, ten kinds. Again, one should know that in reality the one called

Power is also of two kinds. (Thus,) this penetration is said to be divided into

fifty kinds.”

The cause here (of these forms of penetration) is the synthetic

contemplation (anusandhāna)' of the ‘clearly apparent categoriesʼ, that is,

types (prakāra) that will be described (further ahead, consisting) of the Person
and the rest, that are amongst the thirty-six principles, and the principles
the same goal by traversing groupings of them of them, especially the Trika triad, to
which the next verse refers. See commentary to the following verse for an enumeration

of the fifty divisions. In Chapter Three, verses 274cd-281ab (274-280), Abhinaya

presents these 50 samāveśas as equivalent to the fifty forms of reflective awareness
(parāmarśa) that constitute the recognition of the plenitude of AHAṀ of Bhairava, who
is the true nature of the liberated soul, realised through the perfection of Śāmbhavopāya.

!) ṞRead with the printed edition of the MV, paripathyate for nanu caryate. Just before

this passage in the MV we find a brief description of the five corresponding signs of the
descent of Rudra’s power MV (2/14 ff.). See below, 3/293ab (3/292), 13/117cd-120ab,
214-216.

™ Iṭ is probably better to understand -mantreśaśakti- to means ‘the Lords of Mantra

and powerʼ. This is how it is translated in my translation of the MV. I follow Jayaratha
here because it is clear that he understands -nantreśaśakti- to be ‘Mantra and the power
of the Lordʼ, although the expression 7
ti is not at all common. Thuṣ, in Jayaratha’s

commentary to the next verse, he explains the ten aspects of Mantra (which he calls
Vidyā) as ten phases of the utterance of Mantra.

MV 2/17-19. The MV continues saying that these fifty are of three basic types, and

then goes on to present the definition of the types of penetrations in the verses quoted

above in 1/168-170, of which what follows is essentially an explanation. Thus,

Abhinava has reversed the order of presentation again in this case as well, not just that

of the three major penetrations.

” ] ṭranslate the term ‘abhiṣandhi’ and its cognate ‘anusandhāna’ as ‘synthetic

contemplationʼ. 1t is derived from the root sandh in the sense of ‘conjunction’ or

‘coming together’. So ‘abhisandhī and ‘anusandhāna’ also denote the process of
unification or conjoining together. In this case, principles and powers are conjoined in

the contemplative absorption brought about by the penetration that corresponds to them.
The double meaning of these terms is exploited extensively in the Śivasūtra, where the
term ‘(anu- / abhi-) sandhāna’ appears several times. For example, in sūtra 1/6 ——
‘śakticakrānusaṁdhāne viśvasaṁṅhāraḥ. Two translations are required to cover the

original sense thus: “when contemplating (and fusing together) the Wheel of Energies,

the universe is withdrawn’. Cf. also ŚSū 1/20 — śaktisaṁdhāne śarīrotpattiḥ, in this case
the emphasis is reversed ‘when the energies are fused together (and contemplated,) the
body comes into being.”


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


(themselves), that will be explained individually (further ahead in Chapter

Nine).


He (now) describes this division (of the metaphysical principles):


TGTTTJT- JAT{THTTTÑCTHa TTT IIṞ¢S II

etat tattvāntare yat puṁvidyāśaktyātmakaṁ trayam || 187 II
ambhodhikāṣṭhājvalanasaṁkhyair bhedair yataḥ kramāt |
This is so because the three, namely, the Person (Nara), Knowledge
(Vidyā) and Power (Śakti), that are amongst these (thirty-six) metaphysical
principles (and span them), are of four, ten and three different kinds

(bheda), respectively. (187cd-188ab)

(To complete the sense,) an addition (adhyāhāra) (is required, namely,)

‘and they are separate from that (series of thirty-six principles).

1) Thus, there (in that context, it is said concerning the principle of the)

Person (purhs): ‘this Self is of four kinds”." In accord with this dictum, it is
divided into four kinds, characterized as (the four kinds of perceivers called)
Conditioned (Sakala), Dissolution Deconditioned (Pralayākala), Consciousness

Deconditioned (Vijñānākala), and Pure (Śuddha).
2) Similarly, mantra (vidyā) is divided into ten divisions (bheda),"
namely, the letter (varṇa), the Point (Bindu), Half Moon (Ardhacandra), the
Obstructress (Nirodhinī), Sound (Nāda), the End of Sound (Nādanta), Power
(Śakti), the Pervasive One (Vyapinī), the Equal One (Samana),

Transmental (Unmanā).

and the

3) Similarly, Power (śakti) is divided into three divisions, which are (the
powers of) will, (icchā), knowledge (jñāna) and action (kriyā).

The three principles of the Person, Knowledge and Power constitute one of the triads
(trika) that are characteristic of the Trika (‘trūadic’) teachings. Jayaratha is saying that,

just as additions generally need to be made to the aphorisms (siūtra) of Pāṇini’s grammar
for them to make sense (a practice technically called adhyāhāra), similarly here we need

to add the statement that these three principles ‘are separate from that (series of thirtysix principles), in the sense that they are principles in themselves.

The printed edition of MV 1/22c reads jeyas for hy eṣah.
. There are three kinds of pure perceivers above Māyā, namely, Mantras,

Mantreśvaras and Mahāmantreśvaras. These are the perceivers of the thirty-three
priṉciples ending with Sadāśiva (see above, 1/77ab-80ab (1/77-80) and notes). Thus,

they include the penetration of the five gross elements and that of the remaining
principles which, along with four pertaining to the Self, mentioned in the citation from
the MV in the commentary to the previous verse, together make thirty-seven. These,

along with the ten pertaining to Vidyā (called Mantra in the citation) and the three
pertaining to Śakti, together make fifty.

1 Theṣe are the phases of OM and seed-syllable Mantras on the same model, both their

audible phonemic sound (varṇa), which is the first division, and the following nine
above the level of their audible sound.
See Appendix to this chapter.

TANTRĀLOKA

Why has this group of three principles been taught separately? With this

doubt in mind, he says:

TaTTI-āJKTG WCT TITT fkōō
puṅvidyāśaktisaṁjñaṁ yat tat sarvavyāpakaṁ yataḥ || 188 II
avyāpakebhyastenedaṁ bhedena gaṇitaṁ kila |
The three called the Person, Knowledge and Power pervade the

entire (series of thirty-six metaphysical principles). Thus, they have been

reckoned apart from the other (principles), which are not pervasive.”
(188cd-189ab)

(These three principles differ from) the other (principles), ‘which are

not pervasive’, (namely, those) that are pervaded (by these three). The
pervasion of the Principle of the Self (aka the Person) (extends the principle of
Earth) up to Māyā, that of the Principle of Knowledge (from Maāyā) up to
Sadāśiva, and that of the Principle of Power (from that reality level) up to Śiva.
As is said: “(Their) pervasion (extends) progressively (from Earth up to) Māyā,

(from that reality level up to) Sadāśiva, and (finally) right up to Śiva.

Theṣe three pervade the metaphysical principles, whereas the latter do not pervade

each other, and so, differing from them in this way, they are reckoned separateḷy from
them, even though they are constituted by them.

'" Ṛead -prāntavyāptir ity anukramāt for —prāntavyāptrī nanu kramāt.

Cf. tattvatrayaṁ paraṁ khyātam aparaṁ cādhvamadhyagam | SVT 4/403ab
commentary: paraṁ śuddhātmonmanāparaśivarūpaṁ yat tattvatrayaṁ prakāśitam, yac

cāparaṁ

sthūlam

adhvamadhyagam

pañcamapaṭalabhāvitattvabhuvanādhvadīkṣāmadhye
ātmavidyāśivākhyaṁ tattvatrayaṁ

iti

‘(A group of) three principles is said to be supreme. The inferior one is in the
midst of the Path.’ (SVT 4/403ab) The supreme has been revealed to be the triad of

principles consisting of the Pure Self, the Transmental and Paraśiva (Knowledge),
whereas the inferior one is gross and is in the midst of the Path. This is the triad of

principles called the Self (ātman), Knowledge (vidyā) and Śiva that pervade (the
principles up to) Māyā, Sadāśiva and Śiva respectively in the midst of the initiation by
means of the Path of the Worlds (bhuvanādhvadīkṣā) that will be (taught in) Chapter

Five. . .… ḷ

tritattvaṁ yat paraṁ proktaṁ tena cāpūritā tanuḥ || 4-406 II
parādiśaktitrayamayena āmmakalpenetyarthaḥ || 406 ||

‘The body is filled with that which is called the supreme triple principle.”
(4/406cd) The meaning is that (the body is filled) with that which is conceived to be the

Self, consisting of the three powers, Parā and the rest.

etac ca tritattvaṁ yasmād adhvātītaṁ samanāntam atikramya sthitaṁ tasmāt paraṁ
tattvam, yat tu māyāsadāśivaśivavyāptyā tad aparaṁ yasmād adhvamadhyagam, ata


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

This (triad) is not only separate from the other (thirty-six) principles,

rather (they are) also (separate) from one another. He says this:

aśuddhiśuddhyamānatvaśuddhitastu mitho ‘pi tat || 189 II
They are also mutually (related and yet distinguished) as (the
Person, which is the principle that spans) the impure (principles),
(Knowledge, those) in the process of being purified (and so are pure-cumimpure), and (Power, the one that) is pure. (189cd)
The Person is ‘impure’ because (the principles up to Māyā he pervades

and with which he is identified) consist of duality (bheda). Knowledge is ‘in the

process of being purified’ because (the principles above Māyā, from Pure

Knowledge (śuddhavidyā) up to Sadāśiva, which it encompasses and with
which it is identified,) consist of unity-in-diversity (bhedābheda). Power is

‘pure’ because it consists of oneness (abheda).

evāpareṇātmāditattvatrayeṇa dharādeḥ śivāntasyāntaḥkṛtatvāt tad ārabdhā ---aparā sā tanuḥ sthūlā ṣaṭriṁśattattvakalpitā | iyaṁ punaḥ ----

And that triple principle (extends) beyond the Path, it abides (in its place,)

having traversed beyond the end of the Equal One, and so is the supreme principle.
Whereas that which, pervading (the principles up to) Māyā, Sadāśiva and Śiva is the

inferior one, and s0 is ‘in the midst of the Path’. Thus, the inferior one, consisting of the

three principles of the Self and the rest, internalizes (within itself) (the principles)

beginning with Earth up to Śiva. Having done that, that gross inferior body is fashioned
from the thirty-six principles. Again, (concerning) this (it is said):
tattvatrayaṁ paraṁ yac ca sarvatattvādhvavarjitam || 4-407 ||
tena cāpūritāśeṣaṁ sā tattvādhvaparā tanuḥ |

samastādhvātikrāntaṁ yat śuddhātmāditattvatrayaṁ tenoktasatattvenāśeṣaṁ kṛtvā
āpūritā sarvātmatābhāsanena vyāptā yā prakrāntā nādaśaktyātmā tanuḥ sā

tattvādhvanaḥ sakāśāt parā prakṛṣṭā |/ 407 1

‘Everything is filled with the supreme triad of principles, which is devoid of all
the Path of the principles, and that is the supreme body of the Path of the principle.’

(SVT 4/407cd-408ab)
The triad of principles (consisting of) the Pure Self etc. is beyond the entire
Path, and so is said that, having fashioned everything along with (its fundamental)

reality (tattva), the body is ‘filled’ (with everything), that is, pervaded by manifesting as
everything, is the power of Sound (nādaśakti), which (issuing forth) from the Path of the

Principles is ‘supreme’, that is, most excellent.”
The division of the thirty-six principles into three in this way is to make practice
easier for those who are more developed. This takes place at least on two levels. One is
ritual. The realities or aspects of the one reality, like forms of the Deity, attendant

deities, their consorts, varieties of supernatural beings, accomplished yogis, teachers and

more, all have their corresponding mantras. Ritual, whether performed externally or
imagined in various ways to take place within the body, is essentially, from this
perspective, the actualization of these realities — worlds, principles, cosmic forces —

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask,) agreed that this is so, but what is the reason for

mentioning the gross elements separately? With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Five Elements

JT-JTAÑTGTT TTĀRGTTTJT |

[iBāīPRVGEEIGIĒEEGṈṈIḺTI
bhūtāny adhyakṣasiddhāni kāryahetvanumeyataḥ |
tattvavargāt pṛthag bhūtasamākhyāny ata eva hi l| 190 ||

(The existence) of the gross elements (bhiūta) is proved by direct
perception, and so they are classified separately from the (other) group of
principles (tattva), (whose existence) can only be inferred by (their) effects,
(of which they are) the cause (kāryahetu).

The gross elements are proved to exist to this extent by direct
perception. This is why they are taken up (and treated) separately from the other
metaphysical principles, which invariably can only be inferred (to exist, and are
not perceived directly). He says that (by declaring that for this reason they are
classified separately, apart) ‘from the (other) group of principles (tattva)
(whose existence) can only be inferred by (their) effects, (of which they are)

the cause (kāryahetu)ʼ. In this way, here (in this context,) the gross elements

are the preceding causes (of their effects) because, as they are insentient, they

are associated with innumerable (material entities) such as jars etc. This is the

inference. In accord with the dictum that ‘the gross elements (come) from the

subtle ones . . ., ṭheir cause is (the group of five sensations, which are) the

through their corresponding Mantras, so that they can be worshipped as parts of a
cosmos, and the divine beings who reside in it are all sacred and sanctified as
emanations and thereby extensions of Deity. The Mantras are all these things even as
they are the means by which they are worshipped. Arranged in layers, spreading in all

directions along the vertical axis mundi, the parts and divisions of this sacred cosmos

are naturally and systematically ordered. Each layer pervades its own worlds, beings,
principles etc. The layers themselves are also included within the pervasive spheres of

more extensive and encompassing principles and forces. Accordingly, their Mantras are
more inclusive, and their utterance pervades more extensively. In this way, just three,

that is, the Mantras of the SeIf, Vidyā and Śiva, pervade all of them.

Viewing the gamut of reality from the perspective of consciousness

is,

insight, as the Kashmiri masters do, the principles are aspects of the scintillating
manifestation of the cognitive activity of consciousness. These unfold as phases of this
activity ranging from the oneness (abheda) of pure Siva consciousness, through to the

unity-in-diversity (bhedābheda) of the sphere of Śakti, and the duality of the sphere of
the individual Self (ātman).

' Svāyambhuvasūtrasamgraha 33/10a. The whole line reads: tanmātrebhyaś ca
bhūtāni sarvaṁ ca kramaśo ‘sr̥jat | `the gross elements (come) from the subtle elements.

(He) emanated everything gradually (in due order).
The subtle elements are the five sensations perceived by the senses, namely,
sound, form, taste, smell and touch. These sensations combine in various ways to form


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


subtle elements (tanmātra) (whose existence) can be inferred from their effects,

namely, the gross elements. Similarly, by this same (kind of) inference, one can

infer (the existence) of the entire group of principles up to Māyā. This will

(all) be (discussed in Chapter Nine, that deals with) the Path of the Principles,
and so there is (no need) to exert (oneself) here (further). Thus (in short, the

existence of the gross elements (bhūta) is established (directly)) by perception,

‘and so’ (they are classified separately).

the gross elements. Space, for example, which is the subtlest element, is generated from
touch alone. Earth, which is the grossest, is generated from all five, amongst which
smell is predominant. The reason is simple. It is generally believed that pervasive tactile
sensation we have is of Space. Earth has a sound, form, taste, and touch, but above all

has its own characteristic smell. The peculiar ‘materialistic idealism’ of the Sāṁkhya is
aḍopted with adaptations by most theistic schools of Sanskritic Hinduism, including

both Vaiṣṇavism and Śaivism as a whole. It understands that the previous higher, more
subtle principles, are the cause of the lower ones. Within the sphere of Nature, the series

begins with the intellect, ranging down to Earth. Thus, reversing the order, one would
expect the mind, including the intellect, to generate the senses and these, sensations,
from which come the gross elements. As we shall see in Chapter Nine, the principles
below mind are emanated by the ego (aharṁkāra), the third of the three internal senses.

The ‘ṣubtle elements’ (tanmātra) are the five types of sensation perceived by the

five senses, such as the form of an object by sight. They are inferred to exist as

metaphysical principles in their own right, as it is through the sensations we have of
physical objects that, in this idealist view, they exist as objects within consciousness.
The sensations in their turn, from this idealist perspective, exist because of the senses

and so on, up the series of principles, as described in the following note. The principles
up to Māyā exist, according to their nature, within the sphere of objectivity, and so can

be known objectively through inference and direct perception. In the sphere of the
principles beyond Māyā, objectivity is merged in various ways in the subjectivity of

universal consciousness. Thus, these principles are known to exist through the exercise
of the reflective awareness consciousness has of itself. This consciousness is not that of
the individual soul, which is contracted and individual. The subjectivity of this
consciousness, above the sphere of Māyā, is not contracted by it and so is universal, not

individual.
As we shall see in detail in Chapter Nine, the metaphysical principles (tattva) are the

categories into which all the countless individual components of reality and the
experience of it can be classified. For example, all solid physical objects, like jars,
belong to the Earth principle, just as fluid ones to Water. Gross physical entities can be

perceived, others cannot. These are the remaining components or factors that constitute

experience. Travelling upwards, they are the five sensations or subtle elements
(tanmātra), corresponding in the manner described in Chapter Nine to the five gross

elements. These are the sensations perceived by the group of five senses, which is above

them in the series of principles. They are sound (śabda) — hearing, form (rūpa) — sight,
taste (rasa) — tongue, touch (sparśa) — skin, and smell (gandha) — nose. Above them are
the five organs of action: hands (pāṇi), feet (pāda), anus (pāyu), genitals (upasthā) and
speech (vāc). Then come the three inner mental senses: ego (ahaṁkāra), mind (manas),
and intellect (buddhi). Above them is Nature (prakṛti) and the individual soul (puruṣa).
These twenty-five principles are those of the Sāṁkhya. Āgamic Śaivism adds eleven

above them. The six above the individual soul are related to its limitations. These are its
capacity for limited action (kalā) and knowledge (vidyā), attachment (rāga), time (kāla)
and the law of causal and karmic necessity (niyati). They are considered to be aspects or

energies of Māyā, which is the principle above them. The thirty-one principles up to

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask,) agreed that there is (good) reason (to consider)
the gross elements, which can be proved to exist (directly) by perception,
separately from the group of principles that can (only) be inferred to exist.
However, (the question remains,) why should it not also be the case with the

gross elements (surely, are they not also inferred to exist)? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

r̥a f 1

sarvapratītisadbhāvagocaraṁ bhūtam eva hi |
viduś catuṣṭaye cātra sāvakāśe tadāṣthitim || 191 |I
(The gross Elements are called ‘bhūta’, meaning literally ‘existent’,

because) an ‘existent"" js that whose true nature is perceived by

everybody, and they know that to be the case here with four (of the five

gross elements), along with space (āvakāśa) (as the fifth).

(The gross Elements are called ‘bhūta’, meaning literally ‘existent’

because) an ‘existent’, which is the very domain of (true) existence (sattāyā
Māyā are called ‘impure’ (aśuddhatattva), because they are all within the domain of
duality (bheda) in which individual perceivers and agents are related to their objects as
separate multiple entities. This, we have seen, is the sphere of the principle of the Self

(ātmatattva). The following principles are Pure Knowledge (sśuddhavidyā), Īśvara,
Sadāśiva. Śakti and Śiva. The universe emitted by Śiva through His Śakti is experienced
in various ways to be one with the perceiver in the first three of these principles. The

universe exists at these levels in a subtle form, just enough to be experienced as one
with Siva’s universal and transcendental consciousness. Thus, this
is the sphere of unity-

in-difference (bhedabheda), which is that of the Principle of Śakti. The thirty-sixth

principle beyond that is Śiva, Who is pure transcendental oneness. This is the sphere of
nonduality (abheda) which, after the Principle of the Self and Śakti, is the third, the
Principle of Śiva. Beyond these thirty-six, that are common dualist Siddhānta but
understood here in a nondualist perspective, there are said to be two more. The thirty-

seventh is Bhairava, also called Paramasiva, Who is both immanent and transcendent.
Above that is the thirty-eighth principle, which is the Inexplicable. This is necessarily

the last one, because any attempt to define it leads down to a lower one (see below,
11/21-23ab).
AII the thirty-six principles, arranged in this sequence and groupings, form a

causal chain such that the immediately preceding group is the cause of the succeeding

one. This is the reverse of what one would normally think is the case. The five gross
elements are products of sensations, these of the outer senses, these of the inner senses,

these of Nature, and that of Individual Soul whose contracted state of consciousness is a
result of Māyā and its five attendant principles. Māyā is a product of the higher ‘pure
principles. Thus, as the higher principles generate the lower, the upper end of the chain

is the ultimate uncaused cause of everything. The gross elements, which is the last group

in the descending series, are directly perceptible, whereas the others, that is the
principles above them, as our text says, can only be inferred by their effects.

Abhinava plays on the double meaning of the word ‘bhāta’, which means both
‘gross element’ and ‘existent’.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


gocaram eva), is said to be that which is perceived as it truly is by everybody,

(both by) the learned and those who are not, alike. An ‘existent’ (bhūta) is true

(not false), and that is true concerning which there is no difference of opinion by
anybody at any time. Those who are not learned do not perceive (the nature of
anything) when it is an object of inference to that extent (tāvat), whereas those

who are learned, even though they do perceive it, disagree in many ways with
one another (as to what it is), and so there (in that case), it is even possible that

(it can be considered to be) unreal. This is the point (Abhinavagupta is making).
(The word) ‘and’ (means ‘and s0’) for that reason ‘everybody’ ‘knows’ that

the ʻfour’ ending with Air, along with ‘space’, which is (so called) because it

gives space,' that make up the group of five (gross) elements beginning with

Earth, (possess) the ‘condition’ of a gross element (i.e. is truly existent) because
(its) ‘true nature is perceived by everybody’. Thus, it was rightly said that ʻso
the gross elements (bhūta) (are classified separately).
In this way, elemental penetration (bhautāveśa) is of five kinds and the

penetration of the Self is of three kinds. One should include just one of the
divisions of the (penetration of) the Self, that is, the principle of the individual

soul, amongst the (series of) metaphysical principles; otherwise, there would not

be (the required) thirty (forms of) penetration of the principles.' Vidyā, as was
said before, is in its universal (common — sāmanya) aspect, Mantra, and as such,

ten kinds of penetration pertain to it. In (its) specific aspect, it is reckoned

amongst the (pure) principles in the form of the Mantra, Mantreśa and

Mantramaheśa subjects (who are the perceivers in the principles of Pure
Knowledge, Īśvara and Sadāṣiva, respectively). In the same way, having placed
one division of (the principle of) Power amongst the (thirty-six) principles (as
the principle of Śakti), (this) penetration is of two kinds. In the case of Śiva, He
is Himself what is to be penetrated, and so no penetration (takes place) there (in
that case), because His nature is the supreme nondual (reality) (paramādvaya),
with respect to which the distinction (bheda) between the ‘penetrated’ and the

‘penetrator’ is untenable, and so it is rightly said that ‘the penetration of

(Rudra’s power) is of fifty kinds.

Surely (one may ask,) was not the nature of (the penetration of) the

Elements and the rest described in the Mālinīvijayottaratantra after an initial
declaration that the five kinds of penetration of Rudra’s power would be
discussed? (How can that be?) Thus, (in response to this question,) he says:

TRYITRĀTTITTTT.
ṬJHĪ T] T-ĀÑ |
'" The fifth element akāśa — variously translated as ‘space’ or ‘ether° — gives space —
avākāśa — to the entities made of the other elements.
Above, 1/190d.

'"“ Above we were told that the Person is of four kinds, corresponding to four types of

perceivers (see 1/187cd-188ab). Now Jayaratha points out that the penetration

corresponding to it is of three kinds, as the Person is also one of the metaphysical
principles (tattva) and so is not counted separately. Similarly, above we were told that

Śakti is of three kinds, but there are only two corresponding penetrations; the third kind
of Śakti is the metaphysical principle, that is, reality level.

See above, 1/186cd-187ab.

TANTRĀḶOKA

sarīdī vyarāā raārāṁzaī || z82 11|
EFEGIHĒETEIEHḤEĀEEEĀ

ṛāT TTTJTaSĪĪ GJTAHĪ fJērēfrā̄T: 11/283 1

rudraśaktisamāveśaḥ pañcadhā nanu carcyate |

ko ʻvakāśo bhavet tatra bhautāveśādivarṇane || 192 ||

prasaṅgādetaditi cet samādhiḥ sambhavannayam |

nāsmākaṁ mānasāvarjī loko bhinnaruciryataḥ || 193 |
Surely, (one may ask: the Mālinīvijayottara) is expounding the five-

fold penetration of Rudra’s power, so what occasion is there to describe

the penetration of the Elements and the rest there (in that context)? If you
were to justify this by saying that this (topic is discussed there only)
incidentally (in the course of the main discussion, our response is that)
people without (sensible) views and with tastes other than (ours) are not

our own (people). (192-193)

“What occasion is there?” (There is none,) because the penetration of

the Elements and the rest is not a subject taken up for discussion. Talking about

a subject that has not been taken up for discussion (aprastutābhidhāna) occurṣ

when, having begun (by discussing) something, one then talks about something
else. Thus it is said: ‘what occasion is there to describe there the penetration

of the Elements and the rest? Now, although a description of the penetration

of Rudra’s power had been announced, this was discussed ‘incidentallyʼ. This
too is improper and so he says: ‘this (topic is discussed there only)
incidentallyʼ. If something is discussed in addition to that which does not
(directly) concern (the main topic), when (the discussion of that) topic is (so
well) under way that it has been virtually concluded, it is justified (by saying
that) ‘this (topic) is discussed (there only) incidentally (in the course of the

main discussion)”. But here (in this case), although the topic has been

announced, but without having (gone on to) state the definition (of the subject)

and investigated etc.,'" all of a sudden the penetration of the Elements and the

rest is discussed; how is this (discussion) incidental? In that case, as subjects for
discussion (prameya) which are out of context are endless, does that mean that

an incidental’ (topic) would (involve) discussion of innumerable related

subjects? So he says: “(people) without (sensible) views are not our own

(people)ʼ.
Well, if that is the case, then what should one accept (to be the correct
view)?

'” See MV 2/17-19 (quoted above in TĀv ad 1/186cd-187ab), according to which there

are five types of penetration of Rudra’s power (rudraśakti) into the elements (bhūta),
the principles (tattva), the Self, the Lords of Mantra, and Power (Śakti).

' Enunciation (uddeśa), definition (lakṣaṇa) and investigation (parīkṣā) of a topic are
the phases in a formal presentation and discussion of a subject. See below 1/247ab
(1/24ca) ff.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


JTTĀĪ āJI TT

TJIT zaTTSTT |I 28%
1I

ucyate dvaitaśāstreṣu parameśād vibheditā |
bhūtādīnāṁ yathā sātra na tathā dvayavarjite || 194 ||
(We reply) that it is not said here (in this view), which is free of
dualism, that the Elements are different from the Supreme Lord, as it is in
the dualist scriptures.
‘Here’ (means) in (this) nondualist scripture, that is, the venerable

Mālinīvijayottara. ‘That’ duality (is not our view). (Rather,) it is denied, in
order to be free of dualism.

And so, what is that? With this doubt in mind, he says:


The Goddess as the Thirty-six Principles and their Dī

IāTTĪTa:
IST āē-rēf̃ fhzrī |

TTaīdr
ṃarīzēīī rṣTTTRĀTTTĪĪ || 234, 1 |
yāvān ṣaṭṭriṁśakaḥ so ‘yaṁ yad anyad api kiñcana |
etāvatī mahādevī rudraśaktir anargalā || 195 ||
As is this entire group of thirty-six (principles) and so too whatever
else (may exist), such is the extent of the Great Goddess, Who is Rudra’s
power free of (all) restrictions.
(Whatever) ‘else’ (may exist), that is, the (various) types (of orders of

existing things associated with) that (group of thirty-six principles), such as the

world-orders and the like. (The Goddess) is ‘free of (all) restrictions’. The

meaning is that because She pervades (all things, She is) not obstructed

(pratihatā) (by anything)."' As is said:

“This universe is Your Wheel of Energies as the perceived, perceiver
and perception. Some (inscrutable higher reality) shines perpetually in the end,
beginning and middle (between each of them) that is not completely separate

from You (as are these three).”

As everything is the Great Goddess, the objection is groundless, as the elements are

not different from Rudra’s power. Note that Abhinava is also referring in this way to the

extent of the pervasion of the Śāmbhava penetration.

' This verse is from a Krama text. However, the sophisticated idealist presentation of

the twelve phases of the Wheel of Energies, that is, the Twelve Kālīs, is evidence that it

does not belong to original scriptural corpus. Its setting in the form of a hymn reinforces
it. As the phases are twelve, the text postdates Abhinava. Indeed, it is not impossible

that these are his words.

TANTRĀLOKA

He corroborates (his view) with the purport (of the teaching) that is
there (in the Mālinīvijaya):

=āērzr |

IĪṜJēTr TaāzvaTTRŪRT: || q¢ē |1|
tata eva dvitīye ‘sminn adhikāre nyarūpyata |
dharāder viśvarūpatvaṁ pāñcadaśyādibhedataḥ || 196 |
Thus (this is the reason the Lord) described in the second chapter
in this (Maālinīvijayottara) the omniformity of the Earth and the rest (of the)

principles as having fifteen etc. subdivisions.

‘Thus (this is the reason)ʼ, because such (tāvat) is the unfolding

expansion

(sphāra) of Rudra’s power.'

(It is said)

‘in this’

Mālinīvijayottara. As is said there (in the passage) beginning with:

the

‘The Earth principle is differentiated by the division of (seven) energies
(Śakti) and (seven) powerholders (śaktimar), and (so), along with its own nature
(svarūpa), it should be known to be fifteen-fold.’ And ending with: “. . . Śiva,

directly apparent, is not divided.”

” Śee MV 2/1-7ab. This division into fifteen is described in detail below in Chapter

Ten. See especially 10/1-28, 97cd-186ab and notes. We have seen that there are seven

types of perceivers, arranged in a hierarchy along the gamut of the thirty-six principles
(see above, note 598). Each of these, according to its place in the series, has its own

corresponding object, thus making fourteen divisions. The fifteenth is the ‘own nature’

of the two. Thus, as subjectivity develops and reaches the next higher stage of

subjectivity, the divisions decrease two by two until only the ‘own nature’ remains. As
the higher levels are contained in the lower ones, which are their causes as potentials,
and the lower in the higher, as their actualization, all of them contain all the others. This
is their ‘omniformity°.
MS Jh reads -sāratvāt (‘because (such is) the essence (of Rudra’s power)). MS Ñ

reads —sphuraṇavāt and MSs T and DḌ -sphuratvāt, which means the same, namely:

‘because (such is) the pulsating radiance (of Rudra’s power).
' MV 2/2, 7cd. The latter is also quoted below in TĀv ad 10/188cd-192ab. The whole
passage (i.e. MV 2/2-7), which is quoted below in TĀv ad 10/3-5, reads:
‘The Earth principle is differentiated by the division of (seven) energies (śakti)
and (seven) powerholders (sśaktimat), and (so) along with its own nature (svarūpa), it
should be known to be fifteen-fold . . . The subjects who are the possessors of power
(are seven,) from Śiva to the Conditioned (Sakala), and the wise say that the powers are
(also) seven. Those who aspire to (their) respective fruits should know that, like the
Earth, analogously, the aggregate of the various principles from Water to Nature, is
divided into these (fifteen) divisions. In the same way, one should know that the
principles from the Individual Soul up to the Force (of Obscuration) (kalā) can be
divided into thirteen aspects, the (savedya) Dissolution Deconditioned (subjects)
(Pralayākala) into eleven, the same number in Māyā (that is, apavedya Dissolution
Deconditioned subjects), the Consciousness Deconditioned (subjects) (Vijñānākala) into
nine, Mantra (subjects) into seven, Lords of Mantra (subjects) (Mantreśa) into five, the


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

This will (all be described) in (Chapter Ten, which is concerned with)

the division of the principles, so for fear of making the book too long, he has not
gone into (this matter in detail) here.

Surely (one may ask,) if this is (just) talk about the penetration of

Rudra’s energy,'" what is (the use of discussing the) penetration of the
Elements and the rest? Is this not the same defect? Taking into account (this)

doubt, he justifies (this view), presenting an example by way of conclusion.
The Empowered Means

The Divine Attributes and the Purification of Thought

fr’̄rT’TTTTTRTŚTTITT
JEITT] ||/2R4 11]
tasmād yathā purasthe 'rthe guṇādyaṁśāṁśikāmukhāt |
niraṁśabhāvasaṁbodhas tathaivātrāpi budhyatām | 197 I|

Therefore, just as any object which is in front of one is perceived as
ed whole, by means of the partial (perceptions) of its qualities
and the like, know that in the same way here also (the totality of reality can

be grasped part by part).”

Great Lords of Mantras (subjects) (Mahāmantreśa) into three, and that finally, Śiva,

directly apparent, is not divided.”

' Read with MSs Ch, Jh, Ṅ. T, and D: rudraśaktisamāveśo ‘bhidhīyatāṁ for

rudraśaktāv evaṁ samāveśo “bhidhīyatāṁ (.

Rudra’s energy in this way”).

. (juṣṭ) talk about the penetration into

”” Abhinava is explaining how the Śāmbhava penetration and its corresponding state

can be one and undivided, even though a series of penetrations of Rudra’s (that is,
Śiva’s) energy take place along the levels of the subjective and cosmic order. The

model, as usual, is perception. The penetration of Śiva’s energy throughout the cosmic

order is the manner in which He perceives and thereby generates it. Macro- and

microcosm reflect one another within the mirror of consciousness, which generates their
reflection through the perception of its own nature. Thus, if we examine the act of
perception of even the most trivial object, we can understand how Śiva’s energy, the
power of creative perception, operates in relation to the entire cosmic order. There are

fifty penetrations in the first example and fifteen divisions in the second example. One
could add many more ways of dividing up the cosmic order, for example, the thirty-six

principles, 118 worlds, the five cosmic forces and, indeed, any of the countless

configurations of energies and divine forms which constitute the many cosmic maṇḍalas

described in the Tantras. They are the parts of the Whole or, in this perspective, the

qualities of the one conscious substance. Both are held together as the phases of the
dynamism of a single unitary perception without compromising the multiplicity of the
former or the unity of the latter.

We have seen that the first moment of perception is the pure consciousness

within which flashes the immediate direct perception of things in themselves as

manifestations of consciousness. The second moment is one of analysis of this unitary

TANTRĀLOKA

Just as a nearby object, such as a jar, by means of the manifestations
(ābhāsa) of its aspects as, for example, that it is made of copper, is correctly
perceived (as it truly is) in accord with its own specific nature (svālakṣaṇyeṇa),
as (one) undivided and partless (whole,) consisting of the coming together of the

manifestation of many universals (sāmānyābhāsa), ‘īn the same way here

also’ one should understand that the manifestation of all of Rudra’s power (in

its entirety) takes place by means of (its) parts, that is, (the penetration of) the
Elements and the rest.

Even if that is so, what of it? With this doubt in mind, he says:


perception through the conceptualization of the relative distinctions between its parts
and qualities. When we look at an object, the example given here is a jar, we do not

perceive it as a mass of sensations. We see a jar. This is because the analysis of the
second moment is completed in the third moment of synthesis which, like the first
moment, perceives the object as a whole in a state of consciousness which is free of
thought constructs. In the first moment something is seen and a desire or intention arises
to see it in detail, just as a man may like to see the limbs ofa woman or a woman those
of a man. From the universal leveḹ of intention, one descends to the individual level of

analysis and then synthesis to finally rest again in the satisṭied subjectivity which has

perceived its object both part by part and as a whole, that is, with thought constructs at

the individual (āṇava) and empowered (śākta) level and without at the level of pure Śiva
(Śāmbhava) consciousness.

Instead of ‘the manifeṣtation of many universals’, one could also translate

anekasāmānyābhāsa- as ‘many manifestations of universals’. Thus, there are two kinds
of ‘manifestations’ (ābhāsa): manifestations of particulars (viśaṣābhāsa) and
manifestations of universals (sāmānyābhāṣa). Thīs means that according to this view,

when we see a jar, for example, both that particulajar
r manifests in consciousness and

its ‘j̄ar-nessʼ. The latter is necessary because it is that which is represented in the

corresponding thought construct, i.e. ‘this is a jar’. If there were no universal jar to

which the word ‘jar’ corresponds, each individual jar would have to be identified
separately. There would be as many words for a jar as there are jars. Again, every object

is made of parts, and these may be very many, indeed, an infinite number. The same
consideration applies to the parts as to the whole. These too manifest both in their
individual specific form (for example, the handle of the jar,) and the corresponding

universal (in this example, ‘handle-nessʼ). Thus, in a sense, every thing that manifests

consists of an aggregate of manifestations that are (as the totality of them) at once

particular (to that manifeṣṭation) and universal. The same principle applies to the totality
of existence. Indeed, the perception of every single thing when the practitioner is in the
Śambhava ṣtate of consciousness is experienced as everything in this way.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


ata evāvikalpatvadhrauvyaprābhavavaibhavaiḥ |
anyair vā śaktirūpatvād dharmaiḥ svasamavāyibhiḥ || 198 II
sarvaśo 'py atha vāṁśena taṁ vibhaṁ parameśvaram |
upāsate vikalpaughasaṁskārādye śrutotthitāt || 199 ||
te tattatṣyavikalpāntaḥsphurattaddharmapāṭavāt |
dharmiṇaṁ pūrṇadharmaugham abhedenādhiśerate || 200 ||
Therefore, (there are) those who, by the purification of the flux of
(their) thought constructs that takes place by having heard (and studied the

teachings) (śruta), attend with reverence (upāsate) on the Supreme Allpervasive Lord, either in (His) entirety or part by part, by means of His
(divine) attributes such as His (transcendence) beyond thought,
permanence, majesty, glory or others. (AII of these attributes) are equally
(the Lord’s) power (in its entirety) and as such inhere (in one another).
Thus, by the intensity (pātava)' of any one attribute (such as ‘Lord Śiva is
eternal’) manifesting in its corresponding thought construct (repeatedly

formed by reflecting on the teachings concerning His nature), (one) comes
to rest at one with the possessor of (all of) them, Who is the totality of the

flux (of all His divine) attributes. (198-200)

‘Therefore’ — because one knows (the Lord Who is). the possessor of

(all the divine) attributes by knowing just (one of His) attributes."' (One of

them is) ‘permanence’. It is the state of stability (dhrauvya), which is eternal
existence (nityatva). ‘Or others’ — these (other attributes not mentioned here)
include, for example, (the Lord’s) (all-encompassing) plenitude. They ‘inhere
(in one another) because (they are all equally His) power, and so are one. This
is the meaning. Some who, basing themselves on the process of purification of
the flux of thought constructs that arise by having heard (śruta) and pondered on
(cintā) (the meaning of the scriptures)''"" and have as their object this or that

specific (niyata) attribute (of the Lord), enter the Supreme Lord by means of all
the powers mentioned previously or by just one (of His) powers. Once they
have entered (into Him and been penetrated by His powers), with each of their

individual thought constructs manifesting in accord with their own inner form,

they have an ‘intense’ awakened consciousness of those powers, that is,
atṭtributes, whether specific (niyata) or otherwise (aniyata). Having entered into
that, they ‘come to rest at one’ with the Supreme Lord Who is the possessor of
(all) the attributes, that is, energies and ‘totality of the flux (of all His divine)
attributesʼ. (This is) because He scintillates with an endless number of powers

!"”Cf. the usage of this expression below in 1/260a (1/260b) and Jayaratha’s gloss.
! Çf. above 1/65cd (1/66ab).
'!" On the triad — study (śruti), reflection (cintā) and contemplation (bhāvanā), see MV

4/28 ff. and below 13/327. The purification of thought constructs by reflection on the

meaning of the scriptures is one of the cardinal practices of the Empowered Means, as
described below in Chapter Four. In this case, this takes place by cultivating thoughts
such as ‘Lord Śiva is eternal or ‘Śiva is the supreme lord of the universe’, knowing that
this is so because one has learnt it from one’s teacher and the scriptures.

TANTRĀLOKA

and so (His) nature is full (and all-encompassing). The meaning is that they

pulse radiantly as being of that form (and nature).

Surely (one may ask,) why has it been said that an entity, though single
(but) associated with many kinds of attributes, can only come to be perceived
(pratītigocarībhāva) as (a single) undivided (whole,) and not the other way
around? In order to quell this doubt, he corroborates this (teaching by referring
to an authority):

ūcivān ata eva śrīvidyādhipatir ādarāt |

Thus the venerable Vidyādhipati" has said with reverence. (200ef)

He quotes him:


[EEEISEEIEEAGEEEEII

rq 1

3īṁkcfxaāt-rrter
āīṛ VāTTṬYT: TĒaT: || 3, II
tvatsyarūpam avikalpam akṣajā
kalpane na viṣayīkaroti cet |

antarullikhitacitrasaṁvido

no bhaveyur anubhūtayaḥ sphuṭāḥ || 201 ||
“(O Lord,) if (perception,) born of the senses, were not to render
Your inconceivable (avikalpa) nature into an object in (the domain of)

'! Éternity and the other divine attributes of Śiva are aspects of His divine power ~

Sakti, at one with Him. They are not just attributes of Śiva; they are Śiva Himself. The
experience of eternal existence, majesty or glory of Śiva is the experience of Śiva
Himself. By meditating on Śiva as one of them, for example, His glory, which is the
Light that illumines and shines as all things, all His divine attributes are realized

because He is. Awakening to the nature of one or more of these powers, the individual

soul attains the Supreme Lord Who possesses them all and as such is the plenitude of all
His powers that shine inwardly within Him as His inner powers — all aspects of His pure
self-awareness. The experience of the totality of Śiva as the single, undivided oneness of

all His energies and hence all things, is fundamental to the practice of the Divine Means.
Thus, the empowered state of contemplation of one of Śiva’s attributes, recognizing it to

be that of one’s own essential consciousness, leads to the recognition that all His

attributes are those of consciousness, which is one’s own essential nature in the
Śāmbhava state.

'! Viḍyadhipati wrote the Pramāṇastotra, also called Pramāṇastuti or just Mānastuti.

He also wrote the Anubhavastotra that Abhinava cites here. His works are quoted below
in 9/173, 13/127ef-128 (128), 14/9cd-12 and in 17/115ab (where his name is mentioned

as the author of Pramāṇastotra). Gnoli notes that it is also quoted by Rāmakaṇṭha in his
commentary to the Kiraṇatantra, vidyāpāda 19.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


conceptualization (kalpana)," the diverse perceptions that are sketched
out within (consciousness) would not be clear experiences.”

If (direct) sensory perception (pratīti), which is free of thought

constructs, ‘were not to render Your inconceivable (avikalpa)’ī and also
undivided ‘nature into an object in the domain of conceptualization’, having
taken as its support the duality (bhedana) which has as its domain each (of the
many) specific attributes (of the Lord), then such ‘experiences’ ‘would not be’

(possible). The meaning is that they would not arise. (How are they?) They are
‘clear’ and consist of manifestations of the nature of the bearer of the attributes
(that arise) by means of (mukhena) the manifestation of (any) one of (His many)
specific attributes. They are ‘sketched out within (consciousness)” in an

unclear form as ‘diverse perceptions' (saṁvid) that have as their objects (the

Lord’s) many secondary attributes. If (indeed) all experiences (anubhava) are

present in (the one consciousness which is) the possessor of attributes because it

is strewn (ākrānta) with all the attributes, then notions such as ‘that is a
renouncerʼ, (which) every single (perceiver) has, should be of three kinds. Thus,

according to whether they are 1) due to his own (spontaneous) desire, or
2) conditioned by a (particular) aim, or 3) due to (a person’s) skill, (a notion)

would manifest within the possessor of the attributes by means (rnukhena) of a

specific attribute for each (individual) perceiver, not the other way around.'

"!" If one reads, as Gnoli does, kalpanena instead of kalpane na, as Jayaratha does, we
get the meaning ‘if sensory awareness were to perceive Your inconceivable nature with
(just one) act of the imagination . . . Gnoli rightly considers this to be the better
reading. Indeed, Jayaratha struggles to make the one he prefers yield good sense.

"! This quote from Vidyādhipati is set in Rathoddhatā which has eleven syllables each
quarter divided as follows: — u — | u u u | — u — | u -The metre and the content indicates
that it is drawn from his Anubhava-stotra. Concerning Vidyādhipati and his works, see
Appendix concerning citations and sources.

! These arguments apply equally to the perception of Deity as they do to any object,
as they are all manifestations of the Deity’s energies. Any entity possesses a number of
qualities (dharma) or attributes. These may be primary or secondary. The ‘being or
‘table-nessʼ ofa table are primary attributes, without which it would not exist as a table.

Its colour, size and the like are secondary attributes. An object possesses finite qualities,

whereas ultimate reality understood as deity, consciousness or the absolute, possesses
non-finite qualities such as those listed in the previous verses. The nature of an entity
both in its general (sāmānya) nature (for example, ‘table’) and in its specific nature

(‘this green table’) is known through its attributes. The entity in itselfis a manifestation
of consciousness, that is, consciousness itself. It is known in the initial moment of
perception, which is free of thought constructs. One could say that consciousness/deity
knows itself to be such. This indeterminate perception is fundamentally neither
objective nor subjective. Consciousness does not view itself as an object, in relation to
which it is a subject. It simply ‘shines’ as pure and hence as all that manifests. Each

manifestation is distinct, as a configuration of the energies which are aspects and forms

of the one energy of consciousness, which is its essential nature. An entity is what it is
and is known to be such by means of what it does or can do. A table can serve as a

support. A cup can hold water. These capacities or powers it possesses are essentially

aspects of its causal efficacy, that is, the effects that it can bring about. These include

the changes in the eye when they are seen, or the hearing if they make sound. Thus,
attributes and the possessor of the attributes are understood to be related as are powers

TANTRĀLOKA

So, although He possesses an endless number of powers, it is quite reasonable
that manifeṣtation takes place within the Supreme Lord by (just) one power
amongst them.
This (view) is not only proved (siddha) by discriminative reasoning, but
also by scripture. So he says:

The Goddess, the Lord’s Powers and Attributes as Means to Realization

f=t: | 2.2 11

ītāī #ī Tā ÇrT ādTRZṬaTTT || 33 ||

AITX ĒTTHTĪTTGTGĀĪṬ |

tad uktaṁ śrīmataṅgãdau svaśaktikiraṇātmakam |
atha patyur adhiṣṭhānam ityādy uktaṁ viśeṣaṇaiḥ || 202 ||
tasyāṁ divi sudīptātmā niṣkampo ‘calamūrtimān |
kāṣṭhā saiva parā sūkṣmā sarvadikkāmṛtātmikā || 203 ||
pradhvastāvaraṇā śāntā vastumātrātilālasā |
ādyantoparatā sādhvī mūrtitvenopacaryate || 204 ||

The same is said at the beginning (of a chapter) in the venerable

Mataṅgatantra" by (indicating various) distinguishing qualities of what is

stated (concerning the Lord’s sustaining ground) at the beginning (of this
passage, namely,) ‘now, the Lord’s sustaining ground (within which He is
made manifest) consists of the rays of His own energies.’ (Thus it
to the powerholder. Just as every manifestation and all of them together are the one light
of consciousness, so too the countless configurations of energies are aspects and forms
of the one power of consciousness, its freedom (svātantryaśakti) to do any and

everything. Thus, by knowing one power, all of them are known and so too the
powerholder. This happens spontaneously in the state of pure nondiscursive

consciousness. At the level (or one could say in the phase) of perception in which there
are many perceivers engaged in knowing their object, they are differentiated and related

to one another by their thought constructs as are the countless entities that populate daily
life. These may arise in three ways. One is as spontaneously formed conceptual

representations, with no specific aim or purpose. Another is to select manifestations and
render them accessible to serve some purpose the perceiver may have. Or they may be

simply imagined according to the subject’s ability to do so. The two, that is,
manifeṣṭation and its energies on the one hand, and the conceptual representation of

them on the other, work together. This is possible only because the senses and mind, in
the modality of thought, perceive the Light that manifests as it truly is, free of

representations.

'! The expression srīmataiṅgādau could be translated as ‘in the venerable Mataṅga
etc.ʼ, but here Abhinava is quoting directly from it in a specific rather than a general
way. Moreover, this passage does indeed come at the beginning of a chapter of the
MPAĀ.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


continues): ‘(residing in this way) within that light (of His power, He) is
well illumined by nature (sudīpta), He wavers not and (s0) possesses an
immobile form. That same (power) is the supreme level (kāṣṭhā) (of
existence), which, subtle and present in every direction (in space,) is nectar.

(Every) obscuring covering completely destroyed, She is peaceful and is the
intense delight within (that, which is nothing but) reality alone
(vastumātra). Wise (sādhvī), without beginning (or) end, (She) is said

metaphorically to be the iconic form (mūrti) (of the Lord).” (202-204)

The reality which is (the Lord’s) ‘own rays of energiesʼ is ‘the Lord’s

sustaining ground’." This and (other such statements) refer ‘by (indicating
various) distinguishing qualities to the (sustaining ground) that is
distinguished (by them). This is the connected (sense of these verses). The
reading: ‘now, the Lord’s sustaining ground consists of the rays of His own
energiesʼ is that of the Lord’s (own words)."" The author has altered the
reading in order to present the experience (of the Lord’s energy,) which is

such." In order to present these same distinguishing qualities, he has quoted
(literally) from the Tantra, beginning with ‘within that’, and ending with ‘is

said in a secondary senseʼ.

'! MPĀ vidyāpāda 3/1-3ab. These verses serve to lend scriptural authority to the view
that the supreme reality is illumined by one or more of its powers, which are its
sustaining ground, and that the two are aspects of the one reality, metaphorically related
to one another as substance is to its inherent nature or form.

"! Śjva’s energies are not only His sustaining ground; He is all of them and manifests

within them and is manifested by them. The distinction between Śiva as the possessor of
power and His power arises when individual aspects of the one energy are distinguished
on the various levels of manifestation down to the physical, as the countless energies

through which Śiva manifests as all things. At one, they rest within His pure selfreflective awareness, whichis the sustaining ground of His being as the knowledge He

has of Himself. As the Light of consciousness, He is the collective totality of all that
manifests, even as He transcends all the single things that are the energies of the rays of
His Light. As the totality, He is the subject, sustained by all His energies. As individual
things, He is each particular object, sustained in its being by its energies, which are the
ground of its eṣsential nature.

' If I have understood correctly, the alteration Jayaratha is referring to here is a

reversal of the order of the words of this line which, as quoted by him, is also the
reading of the printed edition, namely: atha patyur adhiṣṭhānam svaśaktikiraṇātmakam.
Abhinava quotes this line as svaśaktikiraṇātmakam atha patyur adhiṣṭhānam, i.e. ʻnow,

that which consists of the rays of His own energies is the Lord’s sustaining ground.’

Jayaratha says that by this alteration of the word order Abhinava indicates that this is

what the distinguishing features described in what follows refer to. The rest of the

passage is quoted literally. Indeed, there are no variants with respect to the printed

edition. Jayaratha, it seems, implies that Abhinava does not paraphrase the rest of the

reference, as he tends to do when quoting, in order to underscore the agreement of the

teaching here with that of the MPĀ, even though it is a dualist Siddhāntāgama.

'"" Read with MSs G, Ṅ, T and D, read evaṅvidhānubhavadarśanārtham ‘in order to

present

the

experience

(of the

Lord’s energy)

which

is

such’

for

evaṁ

vidhyanuvādabhāvadarśanārtham in order to show in this way that the procedure

(taught in this Tantra) agrees in its general sense (with the teaching here)ʼ.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘His own energiesʼ, which (He alone possesses and are) not in common

with anything else, are the ‘rays’ as (His attributes,) such as (His) oneness,

luminosity, and endlessness. (They are) the ‘Lord’sʼ, that is, the powerholderʼs,

‘sustaining ground’, which is the place where (He and all things) manifest.
This is the meaning. Power alone is the means to know that. As is said (in the

Vijñānabhairava):


‘Just as the directions and (their) divisions etc. are known by the light of
a lamp and the rays of the sun, in the same way, O beloved, Śiva (is known) by

(means of His) power (Śakti).

Thuṣ, within ‘that’ power which is ‘luminous’, that is, shining, He too
is properly ‘illumined by nature’; that is, His body is the Great Light (of

consciousness). Thus, (He) ‘wavers not’. He is established in His own nature
alone. If He were to fall from His own nature, which is the Light (of

consciousness), all this (universe) would be blind. Thus, He possesses (yukta)
an ‘immobile form’ which, made of the Great Light, is worthy of praise. Thus,

as ʻwithin that’ (power) which is such, this is such (also), so ‘that same
(power) is the supreme level (kāṣṭhā) (of existence)’, which is the

transcendental state of rest. Thus, (that power is) ‘subtle’. It is not possible to
discern it (as some particular, specific entity,) because it is one with the supreme
perceiver. Thus, the most excellent delight ‘within (that which is nothing but)

reality alone (vastumātra)’, that is, the supremely real nature, is its radiant
effulgence. And in this way, by (its) excellence, (all) outer obscuring coverings

have been completely destroyed by it without leaving any residual trace, and
(all) duality (within it) has been completely stilled. This is the meaning. Thus,

(that power) is ‘peaceful’, that is, (Her) nature is (pure) consciousness alone.

This is the meaning. In the same way also (She is) present in all the directions

(in space), that is, Her nature is wonderfully diverse, because (She is) the
universe which consists of (all) mobile and immobile beings. That too is

‘nectar’, (that is to say, She is) eternal and so is ‘without beginning (or) end’.
‘Beginning and ‘endʼ exist in what is impermanent. Thus, (She is) ‘wise’, that
is, devoid of the impurities of defects such as impermanence and the like. This
is the meaning. She who is such ‘is said metaphorically to be the (iconic)
formʼ of the Supreme Lord, Who is the possessor of (that) power, that is, She is
secondarily described as being of that nature. This is the meaning.
Surely (one may ask,) when a metaphorical ascription takes place, it
must be possible to perceive that it is furnished with (all) three (factors),
beginning with the exclusion (bādha) (of the primary meaning, along with
reason for it and its purpose). Is that the case here or not? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

tathopacārasyātraitan nimittaṁ saprayojanam |

''” VBh 21 also quoted below in TĀv ad 3/105cd-106ab. Swami Lakshmanjoo: ‘Energy

is the means by which you can understand and enter in the state of Lord Śiva.’ (2002:
19).


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

Such (as explained in the following verses) is the reason here, along

with purpose of the metaphor. (205ab)

The ‘reason’ (nimitta) is the cause due to which there is a metaphor.
Thisis the sense. By referring there (in that context) to the possessor of power,
(Śiva’s) power, whichis the primary meaning, is excluded, (to give way to the
secondary one which concerns Him). And the relationship between themis that
between the means (whichis Śakti) and the goal (whichis Śiva).


He says that:


E|erĀREEISEIEEIEIEIĪ=re/IIIEAEHI

tanmukhā sphuṭatā dharmiṇy āśu tanmayatāsthitiḥ || 205 ||
ta eva dharmāḥ śaktyākhyās tais tair ucitarūpakaiḥ |
ākāraiḥ paryupāsyante tanmayībhāvasiddhaye || 206 ||
(This metaphor serves to indicate that) the clearly apparent state
(of Śakti) within the bearer of (these) attributes, which is the rapid
(realisation of) the state of oneness with (Him), has that as its entrance

(tanmukhā).

These same (divine) attributes, which are called (Śiva’s) powers, are

venerated as each (of their many) forms, which are appropriate for the

achievement of a state of oneness (tanmayībhāva) (with Siva, who possesses

them)." (205cd-206)

That power is the ‘entrance’ (mmukhā) which is the means (upāya) (to

realise Śiva, the possessor of that power)."" What is said to be (Her) ‘clearly
"" In the following verses up to 209, Abhinava will explain the reason and purpose for

this metaphor, i.e. that Śiva’s energies are His iconic form. The point is that Śiva’s

energies serve as a means to knowing Him just as knowing the parts of an objects are
the means to knowing all ofit.

"" Siṃply stated: when Śiva’s power is clearly manifest, the devotee experiences His

divine attributes, thatis, Śiva’s omnipotence, omniscience, permanence and the like.
When this happens, the devotee instantly becomes one with Siva, who possesses them,

and he realises that in reality they are the attributes of his own fundamental
consciousness, whichis his true nature. In this way, Śiva’s power - Śakti— is the means
to realise Him.
" Oneness (tammayībhāva) with Śiva is achieved through His powers. All forms of
awareness should be realized to be manifest as differentiated aspects of pure
consciousness. That is its radiant pulse (sphurattā). This is the recognition of

Śakti

through which one instantaneously recognizes one's Self to be the powerholder, Whois
none other than the Śaktis themselves. When Śakti is realized, Śiva is realized.

'" Ṭ have translated the expression ‘tanmukhā’ as ‘the means to that’, which is its sense.

But it literally means ‘the face of that (Śakti)’, and is an adjective which qualifies

TANTRĀLOKA

apparent state’? (It is the clearly apparent state of the power of consciousness,
which) ‘is the rapid (realisation) of the state of oneness.’ The intended sense
is that when Śakti has been atṭained, Śiva has been attained. This itself is the

main purpose (of this metaphor).

Thus, he says:


1|
tatra kãcit puṇaḥ śaktir anantā vā mitāś ca vā |
ākṣiped dhavatāsattvanyāyād dūrāntikatvataḥ || 207 ||
Again, due to (its greater) proximity or distance (from universal

consciousness,) a given power (may) encompass an infinite or limited

number (of powers,) in accord with the principle that ‘Being’ (sattva)

includes (every particular entity, while) the dhava-ness (of a Dhava tree
includes only the limited number of existing Dhava trees).
The powers may be ‘infinite or limitedʼ, in line with the principle
that ‘being’ (sattva) (encompasses every particular entity, while) the dhavaness (of a Dhava tree extends to only the limited number of Dhava trees in

existence)ʼ.

The

only

things

that

‘dhava-ness’

includes

are

its

own

manifestations alone (that is, Dhava trees, that) are different from (those things)

that are not Dhava trees. This is the condition (of dhava-ness, whereby) it

includes (only) a limited number of things. However, ‘Being’, on the contrary,
is present everywhere in (both) Dhava trees and (all things that are) not Dhava

trees, and so it includes an infinite (number of) entities. Thus, (energies) that

include a limited (number of) entities are ‘distant (from universal
consciousness) because they are not present everywhere, as they are not
pervasive, whereas those that encompass an endless number of entities are
proximate to it because, pervasive, they are present everywhere.
He (now) connects (what he has been saying back) to the main point.

‘sphuṭatā’ — ʻthe clearly apparent state’. That ‘face, which is Śakti, is the means to

realise Śiva. The shining of divine Light of Śiva’s consciousness with perfect clarity and
lucidity is the experience of the instantaneous realisation of oneness with Him within
Him. This shining of the Light is Śiva’s divine form (mārti), which is His power to
shine in this way for those who are graced by the vision of Him. This is Śiva’s face, the
iconic form in which He is worshipped at the highest level.
"! See above, 1/66ab (1/66) ff., 1/90ab (1/90) and below 9/1-6. Cf. PTy p. 139: ʻThat

which by its absence (entails) the non-existence of something is thus (tāvaṁ) its own
nature, just as (conversely) the (essential) nature of the ‘śiṁśupā-nessʼ (of a Śiṁśupā
tree) is the ‘tree-ness’ (of that tree). That which has no nature of its own within the
expansion of the fixed nature (of things), obscured by the Supreme Lord'’s freedom,
does not exist without it, just as without ‘tree-ness’ (the existence of) Śiṁśupā-ness is
negated.”


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


|| Ṝ 0¢

AINCIGEISVEGĒIITÉISAṂTI

IT. āTTTĀTRTGTTHĪTTHÇT: |I 2°R. 1I
tena pūrṇasvabhāvatvaṁ prakāśatvaṁ cidātmatā |
bhairavatvaṁ viśvaśaktīr ākṣiped vyāpakatvataḥ || 208 II
sadāśivādayas tūrdhvavyāptyabhāvād adhojuṣaḥ |
śaktīḥ samākṣipeyus tadupāsāntikadūrataḥ || 209 ||
Therefore, the (perfect) plenitude of one’s own nature, the
luminosity (prakāśatva) (of the Light of consciousness), the conscious nature
and Bhairava’s state, (are each a divine attribute) that includes all the
powers, because it pervades (them all).

However, (the principles) beginning with Sadāśiva can (only)
include those energies that are below them, because there is no pervasion
upwards. (Thus, the states of realization vary) according to the proximity
or distance (from consciousness of the form) of worship (upāsā). (208-209)
‘The energiesʼ’ of the Īśvara (principle) and the rest are ‘below’ because
their nature is to pervade (the principles below them) and not pervade (what is
above them,) starting from Sadāśiva’s state, (which follows on from that of
perfect) plenitude (and is pervaded by it). (Those powers) which are close to the
nature which is full (and all-encompassing) attain the full (and complete) fruit,

which (includes both) worldly benefits and liberation. Again, when (their)
nature is not full (and complete), (they) on the contrary (only attain a limited)

incomplete state. This is (meant by) saying: “(the states of realization vary)
according to the proximity or distance (from consciousness of the form) of

worship.” Moreover, it is for this reason that there is a difference between
philosophies (darśana) (that is, some lead to a more complete state of

realisation and others to a less complete one).'

Surely (one may object that the deity’s one divine) attribute (dharma),
which is essentially universal (sāmānya) (and hence unlimited), manifests
within thought in a limited way by the power of that (very) thought, and so there
(in that case) it manifests within (the Lord Who is) the bearer of (that one

universal) attribute (in a limited way) by way of that (thought). Thus, this
process should take place in (the sphere of) the Empowered Means, not in (that
of) the Divine (Śāmbhava Means), which is free of thought constructs and is the
undivided manifeṣtation of the (true) nature of an entity (vastu). So how is that
said here (in the context of the teaching concerning the Divine Means)? With
this doubt in mind, he says:

gīTd

'"!É Cf. above, 1/33-35.

TANTRĀLOKA

|| 220 1|

itthaṁbhãve ca śāktākhyo vaikalpikapathakramaḥ |
iha tūkto yatas tasmāt pratiyogyavikalpakam || 210 1|

When this condition (prevails), (this) process'" (which consists

essentially of following) a path (to realisation) formed by (the gradual
intensification (krama)) of thought constructs (such as “I am Siva Who is
endowed with every divine attribute”’) is called the Empowered (Means).
The point of referring to this (process) here (in the course of this exposition

of the means pertaining to Śiva) is that, insofar as it is (a means) that does
not require (the formation of) thought constructs (but rather consists of

their instantaneous eradication, it) is just the opposite of this.

‘Here’ — in the course (of this exposition of the means) pertaining to

Śiva, which is described as the (very) opposite (pratipakṣa) of that (means
which makes use of) thought (namely, the Empowered Means). (Thus,) it is

right that (this other) aspect (which pertains to the Empowered Means) has been
described (here as its opposite counterpart). Thus, nothing has been said that is

irrelevant. Thiṣ is the point. The undivided manifestation of the (true) nature of

an entity (vastu) takes places progressively (in stages) (krameṇa) within (the

domain of) thought, whereas within (the domain) free of thought, (it takes place

instantaneously) without stages (akrameṇa). Thus, wherever one who has
aṭṭained the state free of thought pays attention, he attains Siva there at that very
moment.

He says that:


The Śāmbhava Path Free of Thought Constructs

IRGIĪĪĪTTĪT TT] T] frsīrq 11 222 11
avikalpapathārūḍho yena yena pathā viśet |
' Explained above in 1/198-209.
"! Śaktopāya is the means whereby the universal quality of all differentiated thought

forms manifests within them by the practice of repeated differentiated thought

constructs directed at what is beyond thought. Through this practice, the possessor of
the qualities of consciousness manifests progressively more and more distinctly. There
is a progression (krama) in the development of thought forms until the undivided reality

manifests, while in what is beyond thought there is no such progression. In this context,

the meditation on single energies of Siva belongs to the empowered category, as it

involves focusing on one of them conceptually. At the Śāmbhava level of practice, all
the energies are experienced collectively as the power of freedom and reflective
awareness, which is Siva’s Being (sartā) itself and so one with Him. Abhinava tells us

that the reference to individual energies in the preceding verses is to clearly distinguish

the Empowered from the Supreme category of means, and thus clearly define the latter

in contrast to the former.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


dharāsadāśivāntena tena tena śivībhavet || 211 ||

He who is established on the path free of thought constructs, by

whatever path he enters, from Sadāśiva to Earth, he becomes identified

through it with Śiva.


He gives an example of that:


ṀTÃ. ĨTTG-d TTTTT̄’YaTTTTĪ |I 32 II
nirmale hṛdaye prāgrṛyasphuradbhūmyaṁśabhāsini |
prakāśe tanmukhenaiva saṁvitparaśivātmatā || 212 ||

When the Heart is pure and has within it a light that illumines the
aspect which is the foremost (ever) radiant plane, (then, within that and)

by means of that itself, (one attains) the state of Supreme Śiva Who is
consciousness."
'' The ‘path free of thought constructs’ is the Divine Means, which pertains to Śiva

directly as the exercise of the pure reflective awareness, undistracted by thought
constructs, of the Light of consciousness. Concretely, it involves maintaining an

unwavering awareness of the ‘I-ness’ which is the essence of the pure subjectivity of
consciousness unsullied by even a trace of objectivity. Very few people can practice in
this way, because they are led away from focusing on consciousness by the distracting

desire for something or fear of it, that precipitates into thought. It presupposes a perfect

detachment from outer objectivity, which can only be achieved by cultivating sound
reasoning and discernment. This is achieved by practicing the Empowered Means. But
that too is very difficult for the great majority of people, who must therefore resort to

taking external supports such as the practice of yogic postures (āsana), recitation of
mantras, devotional songs, rituals, and the like, along with more internal practices like

meditation and visualization (for example, of the yogic centres in the body or deities).
But however much these practices may involve the formation of thought constructs,

they are grounded in the pure Śiva consciousness free of thought constructs, and
function effectively to the degree in which it unfolds and develops. Thus, its grace is
both the basis of any means by which the individual soul is freed and the ultimate goal.

More concretely in relation to the subject at hand, all fifty forms of penetration
(samāveśa) into consciousness lead directly to the realisation of Śivas state.

! The citation of this verse in VBh p. 20 reads prāgrasphurat- for prāgṛyasphurat-.

The word for ‘foremost’ or ‘most excellent’ — prāgrya — can also mean ‘what precedes’.
Here it denotes the transcendental level of pure consciousness that precedes
manifestation prior to the formation of differentiated perceptions. t is the Śiva principle

at the beginning of the series of reality levels. Śiva is foremost because He is the first
and precedes all others. Thus, another possible translation of this verse could be: ‘When

the Heart (of reflective awareness) is pure and shines with the Light that illumines the
aspect of the plane of the effulgent pulse of consciousness which precedes (all others,)

then, by means of that, one becomes Supreme Śiva, Who is consciousness.’
"! Iṇ the previous verse, Abhinava explained that in the pure consciousness of
Śāmbhava practice, the yogi can identify with Śiva by means of any one of the thirtyfive principles from Earth to Sadāśiva. Here he explains how the adept enters into
Supreme

Śiva from the thirty-sixth principle, that is, Śiva, when it is illumined by the

TANTRĀLOKA

Here indeed, ‘when the Heart is pure’, its nature is the full (allencompassing) reflective awareness of ‘I’ consciousness. Thus, that which, in
reḷation to other principles is an ‘aspect’ characterized as (the ever) radiant
plane, namely, the thirty-sixth aspect (i.e. the Śiva principle) is made ‘foremost’
(prāgrya), that is, most excellent, by virtue of its indivisible (oneness). Then
(making use of) that aspect of the plane (of consciousness) as a means, one
penetrates into ‘the Light’ (in the Heart) which is the shining (ābhāsa) of that

(aspect) (and so) becomes ‘Śupreme Śiva, Who is consciousnessʼ. This is the

meaning.

Śiva):

He (now) concludes this (section concerning the means pertaining to

JIaTGT TTTIY gHTĪTTTTR̄T; ||/223 |I
evaṅ parecchāśaktyaṁśasadupāyam imaṁ viduḥ |
śāmbhavākhyaṁ samāveśaṁ sumatyantenivāsinaḥ || 213 II

In this way, Sumati’s disciples''™ know this means which is the true

one (sadupāya),'" which is an aspect of the power of the supreme (parā)

will, and is the penetration called ‘pertaining to Śiva’.

This power of the will is the venerable Goddess (bhaṭṭārikā) Parā. This

‘aspectʼ is of that nature. It is said that ‘(that) is considered to be the supreme
(means). It is (the power of) the will (icchā) (to realisation, that achieves its goal

instantaneously)." In accord with this (view), in relation to the Empowered

and other (means), it is the direct means, and so, being such, it is (the supreme)

means (to realisation taught by) ‘Sumati’s disciples’, namely, the venerable

light of the Heart, which is supreme subjectivity. Thus, another possible translation of
this verse could be: “When the Heart (of reflective awareness) is pure and shines with
the Light that illumines the aspect of the plane of the effulgent pulse of consciousness
which precedes (all others,) then by means of that, one becomes Supreme Śiva, Who is

consciousness.”
'' In the citation of this verse in VBh p. 20 summatyantenivāsinaḥ reads amanyanta

nirāsinaḥ. 1 have translated antevasinaḥ to means ‘disciplesʼ, as Jayaratha explains.

However, I take the use of the plural here as an honorific referring to Sumati’s most
excellent disciple, Śambhunātha, Abhinava’s Trika teacher. See following note 1,1127.
'! AIl practice is based on developing and sustaining an expanded state of

consciousness free of thought constructs. In this perspective, the Śāmbhava Means is
ultimately the only true (sar) one grounded in Being (sar), which only pure
consciousness can experience directly. Free of restrictions, it operates directly within
consciousness, that is, reality itself. Accordingly, it is also called the Direct Means or
the Means of Direct Experience (sākṣādupāya). Conversely, the other means operate in

the domain of the thought, notions and duality. The Śāmbhava Means is the means that

operates within the supremely existent and unconditioned One. As we shall see in the
next verse, the other two categories of practice operate in the domain of Māyā
(māyopāya).
'! Above, 1/144d.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Somadeva and the rest. The venerable Somadeva was the disciple of the

venerable Sumati, and his (disciple) was the venerable Śambhunātha. Thiṣ is
(according to) those who know the sequence (of the teachers) that have come

down (through the lineage) (āyātikrama). As he will say: ‘from the venerable


Soma came Sambhunātha, who knew everything.”"' Again:


‘A certain venerable and powerful (vibhu) Bhairava, living in a sacred

seat (pīṭha) in the South,'' gave (out the teachings) in the scriptures of the five
currents,' along with (those) in the wealth of the Atimārga (of Pāśupata
'!” Below, 37/61d. Jayaratha is mistaken here. Abhinava himself tells us that
Śambhunātha was a disciple of Sumati (MVV 1/2-4). Jayaratha’s sole authority for his

view that Soma was the teacher of Śambhunātha is the line he quotes here. Sanderson
has suggested that this mistake is due to a corruption of the text (see Hanneder 1998:
131, note 20). In the printed edition below, and in the manuscript Jayaratha had, the

reading is ‘srīsomataḥ’ — ‘from the venerable Soma’. By emending to śrīsaumataḥ, as
Sanderson suggests, the meaning is ‘from the venerable good one’, which is a
contraction of Sumati — One of Good Mind. Thus here, as in all other instances,
Śambhunātha, who was Abhinavagupta’s Trika teacher, is said to be the direct disciple
of Sumati. Jayaratha is clearly very conscious of the fact that in other references
Śambhunātha figures as Sumati’s disciple. Even s0, he does his best to explain away the

references he himself feels obliged to quote. He also knows very well that the

expression sumatyantenivāsinaḥ can be understood to be an honorific plural (see
previous note) referring to Sumati’s disciple, Śambhunātha. Indeed, it can be read as a

genitive singular. Note also that the
understood to mean the penetration that

penetration ‘called Śāmbhava’ can also be

Śāmbhunātha experienced. The translation is in

accord with Jayaratha’s explanation, as it must be. However, for these reasons, the
following one is better:

‘The (wise) know in this way that this, the true means (sadupāya), which is an

aspect of the power of the supreme (parā) will, is the penetration called ‘pertaining to

Śambhu’ and is that of Sumati’s disciple (Sambhunātha).

'! Somadeva, a Jain monk who lived in South India in the 10 century, refers in his

Yaśastilaka to the existence there of ‘Trika Kaulas (Dyczkowski 1987: 16). So it is not
surprising if the founder of the Trika lineage to which Abhinavagupta belonged lived in

South India.

'! We have seen that Śiva as Saḍāśiva has five faces, each of which has five faces. The

upper face (called Īśāna) utters the five currents of the Śaivāgama. The lower eastern

face, which is that of Tatpuruṣa, utters the scriptures of the Atimārga (lit. the Path
Beyond) (see Dyczkowski 1988: 31 ff.). This was a name for Pāśupata Śaivism, which
is the earliest known form of sectarian Śaivism (rather than Śaiviṣm in general, i.e. the

worship of Śiva as supreme deity). From inscriptional evidence, we know it existed
already in the first centuries of the common era, and so preceded the development of the

Tantras by several centuries. Unfortunately, the original Pāśupata ścriptures (called the
Pramāṇāṣṭaka — the Group of Eight Authorities), have been lost. Even so, we learm a
great deal about the early teachings of the Pāśupata from the Pāśupatasūtra and its
(possibly fifth century) commentary by Kaunṇḍinya, even though it has a markedly
Brahminical bias. We learn something of how it was by the seventh century from a large

Āgama called the Niḥśvāsasaṅhitā, which is being edited by a team of scholars.
Pāśupatas were ascetics who covered their body in ashes and kept matted hair. The
focus of their practice, according to the Pāśupatasūtra, was Liṅga worship, which they
did with five Vedic Mantras dedicated to the five forms of Rudra-Śiva, that were to
become Sadāśiva’s five faces (see Dyczkowski 1988: 19ff.) Their lifestyle, like modern

TANTRĀLOKA

Śaiviṣm).' Sumati was in the world and then, as is well known,' aṟose his
foremost disciple, the venerable Śambhu, who came from the sacred seat

k
(pītha) of Jālandhara.

This is said elsewhere and should be understood with reference (yojya)

to his grand-teacher (paramaguru). Or else (the reason why Śambhunātha is

often said to be Sumati’s direct disciple) may also be explained on the basis of
(the following) view which will be stated further ahead:

“A teacher is said to be as great as is his (spiritual) family (saṅtāna) . . .

for such is the extent of (just) one (true) sage.”

as:

One should understand (the matter) in the same way in such statements

sādhus, was peripatetic. Wandering around the country, they discovered and established

numerous Liṅgas. In this way, they represented one of the major ways in which Śaivism
spread in India, and with it, Liṅga worship with Vedic Mantras, an important practice
still common today throughout India.
'' According to Sanderson (2009 p. 28-29), Atimārga is ‘‘the Path Outside [the Order
of Castes and Disciplines]. Pāñcārthikas and Lākulas were its two major divisions. The
Somasiddhāntin Kāpālikas were ‘closely related in the theology to the Lākulas’.
'" Read prasiddham for prasiddhim.

' Abhinava repeatedly identifies his teacher Śambhunātha with Śambhu, i.e. Śiva, by

this kind of play of words. For example, he praises him at the beginning of the PTv
(intro verse 4) saying:

“(My) first (and foremost) teacher, the venerable Śambhu, who is Śrīkaṇṭha and
the Supreme Lord and has freed a host of fettered souls from (their) fetters by his
priceless glory, is victorious.”
Clearly, ‘Bhairava’ here is the name of a person, not the deity.

"' I is possible that the sacred seat (pīha) of Jālandhara was located in the Kangra
Valley, not far from the modern town of Jālandhara. For a discussion concerning its

possible location, see Dyczkowski 2009: vol. 2, p. 554 ff.

" Jayaratha is apparently telling us that it is Abhinava himself who has said this
‘elsewhere’. Only he could be saying this in relation to his own grand-teacher.
According to Jayaratha, this is Śāmbhunātha. Jayaratha is aware that something is

wrong, because it is clearly stated here that Śāmbhunātha was Sumati’s direct disciple.

So he goes on to somehow justify this evident contradiction.

If this is indeed a verse by Abhinava, we would expect it to be part of opening

benedictory verses at the beginning of a Trika work. If so, this could only be the

Śrīpārvapañcikā. It may well have come after the verse quoted probably from the same
source in TĀv ad 1/6 (see also TĀv ad 1/13 and note 1,211). Indeed, they read well

together as a progression. In the same way, another benedictory verse also probably

from there, below in TĀv ad 23/74cd-75 (note 23, 90) which is dedicated entirely to

Śambhunátha, could well follow on from this one.

'' Jayaratha is referring to verses 1/234cd-236ab (235-236) below. He is quoting the

first and last quarter (i.e. 234d (235a) and 236b (236d). There the reading is yāvān asya
hi saṅtāno . . . tāvān eko yato muniḥ (‘(A teacher is said to be) as great as is his
(spiritual) family (saṁtāna) . . . for such is the extent of (just) one (true) sage.ʼ). The
reading here is ‘yāvān asya hi saṁtānas .……. tāvān eko gurur mataḥ.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

‘Śambhunātha described the essence of the waking and other states (to

me). The darkness (of his ignorance was) dissipated by the moonlight of the

venerable Sumati’s wisdom.

Now, having explained the means pertaining to Śiva, he talks about the
one pertaining to (His) power.
The Empowered Means

IFIS √T-q̄ II ĪT-ĪRJĪ āaḤ |

1I
Śśākto ‘tha bhaṇyate ceto dhīmano ‘haṁkṛti sphuṭam |
savikalpatayā māyāmayam icchādi vastutaḥ || 214 ||
Now we are going to talk about the Empowered (means to

realisation). Mental consciousness (cetas), (consisting) of the intellect, mind

and eg0,"” is clearly evident (to everyone). As it is a state given to

conceptualization (savikalpatā), it is Māyā, (although) in actual fact it
(consists of) the powers of the will and the rest (of consciousness).

That (mental consciousness) is not just mind (manas) here, and so he

says (that it is): ‘the intellect, mind and egoʼ. Thuṣ, it is ‘clearly evident’. The
meaning is that its nature is manifest in a directly apparent manner. And so, in

accord with the teaching that ‘all thought is transmigratory existence . . .,""
(the inner mental organ) is the perception of duality (bhedaprathā), and so he

'' Below, 10/287. According to Jayaratha’s forced interpretation, Abhinava refers to
what Jayaratha considers to be his teacher’s teacher in order to further strengthen the

authoritativeness of the teachings he has received. The essential oneness between the
teacher and disciple is more intensely realised to the degree in which the lineage to

which they belong is well established and based on the direct realisation of each of its
members of their essential oneness. Abhinavagupta was one with his Trika teacher
Śambhunātha, as was Śambhunātha with his teacher Somadeva and Somadeva with
Sumati. This is why Abhinava can refer to Sumati as Śambhunātha’s teacher. In short,
Jayaratha implicitly wants us to understand that Abhinava preferred to refer to Sumati,
rather than Somadeva, as Śambhunātha’s teacher, because as the founder of this Trika
lineage, he is the teacher of all the teachers in the lineage, with whom he is one.

'” Concerning the three internal senses, see below, 9/227 ff. and SāṁKā 23-27.
'! Thiṣ dictum is quoted again below in TĀv ad 4/111cd-113ab, 14/13 and ad

16/283cd-284ab (284). Bhagavadotpala quotes the complete line in his commentary on
SpkKā 1, saying that it is from the Naradasaṅgraha. The second half says: ‘there is no

bondage apart from thought’. Vāmanadatta also quotes the first half in his

Saṅvitprakāśa (3/2) and explains: ‘The sense of the saying ‘all thought is
transmigratory existence is this: the lack of (inherent) existence (asattva) of creation (in
itself) abides as the (inherent) existence of pure consciousness.' Maheśvarānanda quotes

this verse in his MM (p. 25). Just before it he quotes another from the same source
which further aids our understanding of it: ‘Therefore thought by being purified is not
separate from consciousness. Thus, (for that very reason,) this (state) devoid of thought
(nirvikalpa) is thought established within its own (essential conscious) nature.”

TANTRĀLOKA

says: “as it is a state given to conceptualization (savikalpatā), it is Māyā. But
even though this is so, in reality (the inner mental organ) is, according to its
application (yathāyogam), that (same) will, knowledge and action (of
consciousness), and so he says: ‘in actual fact it (consists of) the powers of
the will and the rest’. Indeed, just as the Lord makes the universe by means of
(His) powers, beginning with the will (that is, will knowledge and action), in the
very same way, the fettered soul (generates) thought constructs etc. by means of
the three inner mental organs, beginning with the intellect (that is, the intellect,
mind and ego, to which they respectively correspond). This is the sense (of thīs
verse). It is said in this way that the individual perceiver (kṣetrajña) possesses
the freedom (to create) thought and the like, and their creation depends on these
three. This is what has been taught in this way.

Thus, he says:


JTr̄ṛT=ī āgTTRTTTTTĒT] Z: |

īārd iārzūēh: 11 224 1|
abhimānena saṅkalpādhyavasāyakrameṇa yaḥ |
Śśāktaḥ sa māyopāyo ‘pi tadante nirvikalpakaḥ l| 215 |I
The Empowered (means to realisation functions) by the successive
(operation of these three mental faculties, beginning with the ego, which)

arrogates (a personal identity) (abhimāna). (Identification is followed by
the activity of the mind, which forms) the intention (saṅkalpa) (to
comprehend, and then the intellect, which makes the final conceptual)

ascertainment (adhyavasāya)."” Although this means is based on Māyā

(mmāyopāya) (insofar as it functions in this way), at the end of that (process

one ultimately attains a state of consciousness which is) free of thought
constructs.

Having (first of all) arrogated agency here within one’s self by laying
hold of ego, then forming an intention with regards to (some) external object as,
for example, desirable, as ‘this (is the goal), not that’, and by discarding

(vyapoha) (all) else and come to the conclusion (niścaya) that ‘I alone am

present everywhere’ or ‘everything is present within me’, the conceptual
perception (vaikalpikapratyaya), which is such, pertaining to the empowered
(means) arises. (But) even though (this) means is Māyā by nature, because
thought constructs are grounded on relative distinctions (bheda), (even s0,) by
the power of repeatedly exercising those thought constructs, correspondingly
more excellent thought constructs are produced, and so, in the end, the
penetration pertaining to Śiva takes place, which is (a condition) free of thought
constructs, and is the most (perfectly) clear, direct perception of reality (artha).

This is the meaning. As he will say in the passage beginning with:


'' Conceptual ‘ascertainment’ (adhyavasāya) of the empirical nature of things, which
marks the culmination of sensorial cognition, is the specific function of the intellect. See
above 1/38cd-39 and below, 9/238.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

‘He who wishes to enter into this, the Supreme Lord’s nature, described

in the previous chapter, must purify (his) thought (properly and) without delay
(añjasā).”

And ending with:


‘Thus (as a result of this process), consciousness, strengthened by that
noble and supremely clear nature (of the most lucid notion), attains (its own)

pure state of being, which is free of thought constructs.’'

This is why it is said that the Empowered Means is a means to (the

higher) means.

Surely (one may ask,) the spontaneous (svārasika) and nonconceptual
validating experience (pratyaya) of all these (functions) of the ego and the rest
(asmadādi) comes about effortlessly. So there (in that case), why is (the means)
said to be the Śāmbhava penetration, which is also taught as being the goal (to
be attained)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ēa- || 32. 1|
pašśor vai yāvikalpā bhūr daśā sā śāmbhavī paramṃ ḷ

apūrṇā mātṛdaurātmyāt tadapāye vikasvarā || 216 ||
The plane (daśā) of (consciousness that even) the fettered soul
(experiences in the first moment of perception) free of thought constructs,

is Śiva’s (state) (Śāmbhavī).™" However (param), (falling as it does to the
level of discursive, conceptual consciousness,) it is incomplete (apūrṇā) as a
result of (his) miserable state (daurātmya) (as an individual, conditioned)
subject. But once that (miserable state) ceases, it unfolds.
said:

That is the plane of (consciousness) free of thought constructs. As is
‘on that plane (of Being) (in the prediscursive moment of knowledge,)

even the fettered soul (experiences) Īśvara’s state (of consciousness).”'
! Below, 4/2 and 4/6.

'! The feminine of the adjective ‘śāmbhava’ — ‘pertaining to Śambhu (i.e. Śivay, is
‘sāmbhavī. It agrees with the feminine noun ‘daśā’, meaning ‘state’ or ‘level’.

'! Jayaratha is quoting here from Utpaladeva’s lost commentary (Jīkā) on his own

Pratyabhijñākārikā. Īśvara’s state of consciousness is the experience that ‘(all) this am

Ṅ (idam aham). The Sadāśiva level above, into which it spontaneously develops, is ‘I

am (all) this’ (aham idam). The former corresponds to the subtle contraction of
subjectivity brought about by the subtle emergence within universal consciousness of
objectivity. The latter corresponds to the subtle expansion of the subjectivity associated

with the withdrawal of objectivity. This play of expansion and contraction is

TANTRĀLOKA

If that is so, then what is the point of making (all this) effort here to

teach it etc.? (In response to this question,) he says that ‘however, it is
incomplete (apūrṇā). The knowledge and action of the (fettered, conditioned,)

contracted subject are contracted. So there (in that case), how can that miserable

soul (experience and possess) Śiva’s state (śāmbhava) (clearly and) directly

(sākṣāt)? This is the point. Thus, when ‘(his) miserable state (as an individual,
conditioned) subject” ‘ceasesʼ, and the plenitude (of Śiva’s consciousness)

pours forth, that plane (of consciousness free of thought constructs) that pertains
to Śiva (śāmbhavī) ‘unfolds’, endowed with a full (and complete) (piūrṇa)
knowing and acting subjectivity etc. This is the meaning. Thus, an effort etc. to
teach (this) should most certainly be assumed in order to bring about the
recognition of one’s own (true Śiva) nature, which is heralded by the removal of
the contracted knowing and acting subjectivity etc. (of the fettered state). Thus,
(the teaching is) proved (to be correct).
(Now) he connects that (point) to the main point.

1|

7 |
aT aJTRI-RTTHHITTĪ JĪRRZSsarī || 32¢ 1I
evaṁ vaikalpikī bhūmiḥ śākte kartṛtvavedane |
yasyāṅṁ sphuṭe parantv asyāṁ saṅkocaḥ pūrvanītitaḥ l| 217 ||
tathā saṅkocasambhāravilāyanaparasya tu |
sā yatheṣṭāntarābhāsakāriṇī śaktir ujjvalā || 218 II
Such is the plane of thought constructs (operant) in the Empowered
(means), in which (the individual subject’s) agency (kartṛtva) and cognitive

awareness (vedana) are clearly evident (to him). However, for the
aforestated reasons, on this (plane, consciousness) is contracted.

One who is intent in this way on dissolving away the burden of

(this) contraction possesses that blazing power (of consciousness) that
brings about the inner manifestation as desired. (217-218)

Even though here in the Empowered Means, which is essentially
conceptual cognitive consciousness (savikalpajñāna), knowledge and action
are, by (their) dependence on the thought-free (consciousness of the Śāmbhava

experienced in the prediscursive moment of perception. In the case of the sense of sight,

for example, this is practiced by just ‘seeing’, whilst focusing on the seer without
aṭṭending to what is being specifically seen.

'! Read parantv asyāṁ for paraṁ tv asyāṁ.

"! Practically all schools of Indian philosophy agree that thought is accompanied by

speech. It is a kind of inner talking (antaḥsaṁjalpa). From this point of view, a
perception clothed in thought is ‘discursive’, just as the pure cognitive consciousness
which precedes it, devoid of thought constructs, is ‘nondiscursive’.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


state), ‘clearly evident’. But even so, due to the miserable state of the subject,

they are contracted. Thus, here also an effort to teach it etc. must necessarily be
made, by virtue of which that empowered (state) (may) blaze forth and unfold,
as intent on dissolving away (this) contracted (state of consciousness). This

(power of consciousness) brings about the ‘inner manifestation’, which is the
oneness with the (supreme) subject (the seeker) desires, as the goal (to be
achieved) (upeya). The meaning is that (the power of consciousness) shines

radiantly as oneness with the supreme subject."'

Surely (one may ask,) the difference between the Empowered and

Divine (Means) has been established, because (the former is associated with)
thought constructs and (the latter is) free of them, but as the Individual (Means)

is also (essentially) only (operating through) thought constructs, how can the
difference between it and that (Empowered Means be established)? Having
(first) presented the question, he (goes on to) explain the difference between
them.
The Individual Means

] ṁhfcāi fēē ssīāōḷr tcā a a |

STSHTĀ IIṜZŚI
!! Read with MSs Kh, Ch, J, Jh, N and T parapramātraikātmyarūpatyā for

parapramãtreka-rūpatyā.

Practicing

at

the

level

of

the

Empowered

Means,

consciousness is contracted because the practitioner identifies himself as the particular
individual he is in relation to his body and, more specifically, his mind. He is strongly

conscious of himself as the subject who knows and acts but is wrapped up in his thought
constructs about himself. He thinks that ‘I am so and so’, not Śiva. His subjectivity — as
agent and perceiver — appear to him to be that of an individual centre of consciousness,
which is separate from Śiva. Thought constructs are a bridge, as it were, between
subject and object. The self-awareness ‘I am so and so’ is a though construct. The

person with which ‘T, the subject, is equated is an object of thought, identified with the

body, related to and, indeed, formed from the complex workings of the mind, in which it

is apperceived. This apperception is the ‘miserable state’ of the pure, unconditioned
subject reduced to this condition. However, practicing the Empowered Means, he
reflects on the meaning of the teachings he has received from his teacher and reads in
the scriptures and the treatises which teach nondualist Śaivism. Thus, he cultivates and

reinforces day after day the thought ‘I am Śiva’. In this way the conceived subjectivity
is purified of its mistaken conception of itself that contracts consciousness and so also
its knowledge and action. As the notion ‘ am Śiva’ becomes more lucid and radiantly
clear, he approaches closer to the self-reflective awareness of fundamental ‘I’

consciousness which is not a thought construct (vikalpa). The pure awareness, now free
of thought constructs other than ‘I am Śiva’, has no outer objective referent. It is the

awareness Śiva has of Himself as pure, all-embracing consciousness from which
nothing is excluded. Thus, when this process attains its goal, consciousness, free of
thought constructs, at the Śāmbhava level unfolds ‘generating the inner manifestation
one desires of the goal, which is the realisation of oneself as the supreme subject,

which is oneness with Śiva. This is what happens directly for those who practice on the
nondiscursive level of the Śāmbhava means to realisation.

TANTRĀLOKA

nanu vaikalpikī kiṁ dhīr āṇave nāsti tatra sā |

anyopāyātra tūccārarahitatvaṁ nyarūpayat || 219 ||
Surely, (one may ask, does this mean that) there in (the domain of
the exercise of) the Individual Means, the intellect is not engaged in
thought? (No, thought persists in this means also. The difference between

them is that the intellect in the course of practicing Individual Means is

mediated by) other means (anyopāya), (whereas) here (the Lord) has said

(in the Mālinīvijayottara that the Empowered Means) is devoid (of other

practices such as the) utterance (of Mantras).

(One does practice) concentration (samādhi) ‘there’ (in the Individual

Means), (but there are) ‘other” (means also,) such as the utterances (of the vital

breath and Mantras) and the like. Having taken the support in (the course of the

practice of) the Individual (Means) of outer (practices) such as the utterance (of

the vital breath and Mantra), the intellect is given to thought. What is special
(and different) ‘here’ in (the practice of) the Empowered (Means) is that it is
devoid of those (external practices). Thus it is said here that (what is meant by

stating that the Empowered Means operates) ‘y the mind alone’ is that it

consists of just pondering with determination (and conviction) (sāvadhāraṇa)
(on one's own identity with Śiva).
Surely, (one may ask,) is (the Empowered Means) here (according to

the teaching), devoid only of (the practice of) the utterance (of the vital breath

and Mantras) or (is it) also devoid of (the practice of) the instruments (of yoga)
(karaṇa) and other such (practices)? Thus, he says:

3=NRWIGĀT
TGGT] HTĒ
TTTaT: |

uccāraśabdenātroktā bahvantena tadādayaḥ |

Śśaktyupāye na santy ete bhedābhedau hi śaktitā || 220 ||

"S MV 2/22, see above, 1/169.
''” Cf. below 5/2-5. Ritual, which entails the utterance of Mantras and outer ritual

action, generally takes place in the sphere of the Individual Means (āṇavopāya). Buṭ it is

possible to engage in some Kaula rites, such as those described in Chapter Twenty-

Nine, in the empowered state of consciousness, in which case they also belong to the
Empowered Means, and are based on the expansion of consciousness (vikāsa) that takes
place by union of Śiva and Śakti, internally, and possibly also externally. This
‘expansion in the centre’ takes place in the core of consciousness by the union of the

energies that radiate from it out through the mind and the senses and those of their

objects. The outer rite strengthens and at the same time, develops through the inner, as
perceptions clothed in thought constructs give way progressively to the immediacy of
direct pure perception free of thought constructs. Thus, practiced this way, these rites do
not require the recitation of Mantras, which is what distinguishes them from the

common, outer rituals that belong to the Individual Means.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


The word ‘utterance’ here by (its) plural (case) ending (also
implicitly) states ‘and the rest’ (ādayaḥ) (with reference to the other
practices of the Individual Means, indicating) that they are absent in the

Empowered Means." The empowered state (śaktitā) is one of unity and
difference (not duality as is the individual state).

The sense is that one gets the meaning ‘and the rest’ by (the use of) the
‘plural (case) ending’. Thus (the practice of the Empowered Means is said to

be) devoid of the utterances (of the vital breaths and Mantras). This

is how one

should explain (the way this compound) is analysed. These utterances (of the
vital breaths and Mantras) and (the practice of the yogic) instruments, postures

(karaṇa) etc. are absentʼ (in the practice of the Empowered Means,) because
they are entirely based on duality (bheda). (However,) here (in the practice of

the Empowered Means) there is nonduality, as there is no external utterance of
Mantra and the like, and there is duality also, because it consists of (the
purification of) thought constructs. Thus, it consists of both. Accordingly, he

says that: ‘ṭhe empowered state (śaktitā) is one of unity and difference’,'
whereas duality predominates in (the practice of the) Individual (Means).

He says that:


GeTIa: |

rd̃- fāṁkcŪē: 1| 2 2 II
! The reference here is to verse 1/170 (= MV 2/21) above which reads:

uccārakaraṇadhyānavarṇasthānaprakalpanaiḥ |

yo bhavet sa samāveśaḥ samyag āṇava ucyate ||

‘The penetration that takes place by the utterance (of the vital breath and
Mantra) (uccāra), bodily postures (karaṇa), visualization (dhyāna), the letters (varṇa)

and the formation of places (sthānakalpanā) is appropriately said to pertain to the
individual soul (āṇava).”

The kinds of practices belonging to the category of the Individual Means are
listed in a single compound word that constitutes the first line of this verse. Abhinava is
referring to the plural ending of this word (-aiḥ). In other the words, ‘the utterance (of
the vital breath and Mantra) (uccāra) stands for all of them and so implies ‘etc.” also.

'' Another way one can explain how the empowered state (śaktitā) is one of unity-in-

diversity is as follows. The Sāmbhava state is oneness with Śiva, and

so is clearly based

on nonduality. The individual (āṇava) state of individualized consciousness is clearly

based on duality, that is, the distinction between subject and object as well as between
individual objects and perceivers. In the former the power of the will as the intention to
perceive or act latent in pure nondiscursive consciousness at the initial moment of
perception dominates. In the latter, the power of action. The empowered state is between

the two. The practice to which it leads commences with dualistic thought constructs and

ends in the nondual consciousness of Śiva, free of thought constructs. It operates in the

flux of the power of knowledge which flows from the oneness of the perceiver and

agent to the multiplicity of the perceived object and phenomena which are the product
of its activity (kārya).

TANTRĀLOKA

aṇur nāma sphuṭo bhedas tadupāya ihāṇavaḥ |
vikalpaniścayātmaiva paryante nirvikalpakaḥ || 221 ||

The duality (bheda) between individual souls (aṇu)' is evident.

Here the means relating to it (that resolves it) is the individual one (āṉava).
Its essential nature is the certainty (which is the correct determination of)
conceptual representation (vikalpaniścaya). Ulṭimately (it culminates in a

state of consciousness that is) free of thought constructs."

By saying that ‘ultimately (it culminates in a state of consciousness
that is) free of thought constructs’ he indicates that (the practice of the

Individual Means) also comes to rest in the same (means) pertaining to Siva.

Surely (one may ask,) according to the principle declared (above where
we read): ‘however, (the principles) beginning with Sadāśiva can (only) include
those energies that are below them because there is no pervasion upwards,
the intellect and the rest (of the mental faculties) do not function within Śiva. So
how can it be said that they serve as a means to attain Him? Thus, he says:

Taftṝṁaṁ ũ̃ ēfl haṁhzrq ú 2==1
3-aīĪ āī̄TS-NTh fīā ā aef=. |

TaTRṬĪTTTĪ Gāī TJJRĪJ: ṬTTĀTĪ || 323I

nanu dhīmānasāhaṁkṛtpumāṁso vyāpnuyuḥ śivam |
nādhovartitayā tena kathitaṁ katham īdṛśam || 222 ||
ucyate yastuto ‘smākaṁ śiva eva tathāvidhaḥ |
svarūpagopanaṁ kr̥tvā svaprakāśaḥ punas tathā || 223 ||

Surely (someone may object that neither) the intellect, mind, ego,

(mor) the individual soul can pervade Śiva, because they (belong to orders

'' I have tentatively emended the reading in the printed edition ~ aṇur nāma sphuṭo

bhedas (‘t is evident that the individual soul is dualityʼ), which makes no sense to
aṇūnāṅṁ tu sphuṭo bhedas.

'' Cf. below 5/2-5. In this perspective, outer practices such as ritual performance or

internal yoga are based on thought constructs that are effective insofar as they sustain

the development of insight. For this to take place, they must be done with mindful

awareness of the presence of consciousness and its power to act through the objective

medium of the psychophysical organism and operate in the domain of outer objectivity.
Practicing in this way, thought constructs become progressively more subtle and

focused on a true representation of one’s own nature and all that exists as divine

consciousness. As that happens, insight into its true all-embracing nature develops with
the growing sense of certainty. This ultimately reaches the state of rest within the
supreme transcendental and universal subjectivity of Śiva Himself, Who comes to be
recognised as one’s own most fundamental identity and that of all things. Thusṣ, to the
degree this higher subjectivity becomes more stable, practice shifts from the domain of
the Individual Means through the Empowered to the Divine.
'' Above, 1/209abc.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


of reality that) are below (Him), so how is it that (you) said such a thing

(which implies the contrary)?

(In reply to such objections,) it is said that according to us, in actual
fact Śiva Himself is such (i.e. the intellect etc). After He has concealed (His)
own nature, He again in the same way, (by virtue of His freedom, through

that same intellect and mind, becomes His) own light. (222-223)

Here ‘according to us’ʼ, that is, in the view of those who profess
nonduality, ‘in actual fact Śiva Himself’, having concealed Himself by the
glorious power of His own freedom, in accord with the principle that ‘Śiva

Himself has assumed the state of the fettered soulʼ," ‘is suchī, that is, the

limited subject in the form of the intellect and the rest (of the mental faculties).

Then again, He Himself, by diveṣting (Himself of limitation) by progressively
setting aside (identification with) the intellect and the rest, in the same way
becomes Śiva Himself Who is His ‘own Light’. Thus, whether the intellect and

the rest are operating or not even within Śiva, there is no defect at all (in our

doctrine).
That is also said in the dualist scriptures, not only in the nondualist

ones. So he says:

sṛāṛaaīq; fdrrṁāī a ārrī zatk: || 33%1I

Eikctēe
c EEḤ

dvaitaśāstre mataṅgādau cāpy etat sunirūpitam |
adhovyāptuḥ śivasyaiva sa prakāśo vyavasthitaḥ || 224 ||
yena buddhimanobhūmāv api bhāti paraṁ padam |

The same (view) is also well expressed in dualist scriptures such as
the Mataṅgatantra, (which declares) that the light of Śiva, Who pervades
(the levels) below (Him), persists, due to which the supreme level (continues

to) shine even on the (lower) plane of the intellect and the mind. (224-

225ab) (224-225cd)

"! That is, that the mind and the rest can serve as a means to realizing Śiva. See above,
verse 1/215.
! One could also translate svaprakāśa ‘illumines himself’
! PS 5d. The complete verse reads: tatrāntar viśvam idaṁ vicitratanu — karaṇa —-

bhuvanasaṁtāṇam | bhoktā ca tatra dehī śiva eva gṛhītapaśubhāvaḥ || ‘There within
(the four Eggs) is this universe, that is, the series of worlds (inhabited by beings with)
various (astonishing) bodies and (their) sense organs of sense. The experiencing subject

there is an embodied being who is Siva Himself who has assumed the state of the
fettered soul. This quarter is quoted again below in TĀv ad 1/331 (330) and ad

9/144cd-145ab.
Cf

ad
6/4lcd-42ab
šivasyaiva . svasvātantryād
grhītapaśubhāvasyetyarthaḥ Śiva Himself has assumed the state of the fettered soul by
virtue of His freedom (to do 50).”

!' These lines are effectively a commentary on MPĀ vidyāpāda 3/21cd-22ab, which is

quoted by Jayaratha.

TANTRĀLOKA


As is said there:


‘In this way, the great (metaphysical) principle (tattva) free (from any
defect for which it could be) criticized and rich with thousands of radiant rays,
pervades below from that principle of (Śiva) that possesses (every divine)

quality.”

He concludes saying: ‘He Who pervades (the levels) below (Him)’

etc. ‘That’ (light of consciousness) is in the form of the intellect and the rest

‘due to which’, that is, because the intellect etc. are at one with Śiva’s light,

(the supreme level continues to shine even on that lower plane).

Having thus explained that by the way, (he goes on) to discuss the
(main) subject (at hand).

All the Means Attain the Same Goal

Jr 1| 224|
''” MPĀ vidyāpāda 3/21cd-22ab. Also quoted below in the TĀv ad 8/379cd-380ab

(379). This is a reference to Bindu — the Point which, in this context, represents the

supreme reality in a manifest state, that is, the supreme principle as Śiva’s Light set in
relation to the sphere of worldly experience (bhoga). See below, 8/378ab (8/377) ff.
commentary and notes for an analysis, especially 8/379cd-381ab (8/379-380) and notes.

"' n the previous verses, Abhinava explained that the Light of Śiva consciousness can

shine at the levels of the intellect and mind because Śiva freely chooses to limit His
infinite consciousness to assume that finite form. He goes on here to say that even the
dualist Siddhānta agrees that Śiva’s Light shines there even though they belong to a
separate distinct reality. This is not because they are one with Śiva’s Light but because it
pervades the lower levels also. Although dualist Śaivites maintain that Śiva differs from
the individual souls and the lower principles, starting with Māyā down through the
psychophysical body to the outside world, even so, they teach that He penetrates the
consciousness of individual souls, and they experience Śiva’s bliss when they
experience that He pervades everything. At first sight, it appears that Jayaratha has

missed the point. But what he means to say is that what the dualists maintain can only
be possible if the lower levels are essentially one with Śiva. In other words, Śiva’s

divine attribute of omnipresence or His ‘pervasion’ (vyāpti), to which dualist Śaivites
repeatedly refer to account for the necessary inter-relationship between Him, individual
souls and the world in which they reside, can only be possible if they are essentially one.
From the nondualist perspective, the condition of ‘pervasion’ is a state of oneness
between that which pervades (vyāpaka) and what it pervades (vyāpya). At the lower

levels one experiences a difference between them. In states of contemplative absorption

(samādhi) Śiva consciousness does shine within the intellect and mind but, according to

this nondualist view, that is not the full realisation of Śiva consciousness. It is the

experience of that at the individual (āṇava) and empowered (śākta) levels on which Śiva

freely manifests at the most subtle level of objectivity as Deity. At the supreme, nondual

level of Śāmbhava practice, there is no objectivity at all. Śiva consciousness expands
within itself, through itself into itself in the perennial eternity of His consciousness. At
the lower individualized level of contracted consciousness this is experienced as
the
spontaneous arising and falling away of ever-new manifestation in the procession of

time.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


dvāv apy etau samāveśau nirvikalpārṇavaṁ prati || 225 ||
prayāta eva tadrūḍhiṁ vinā naiva hi kiñcana |
Both these two penetrations (Individual and Empowered) are

directed towards the ocean of (consciousness) free of thought constructs.
Indeed, nothing could exist that is not established in it. (225cd-226ab)

Both of these are ‘directed towards’, that is, are propense towards
(expanding consciousness) in the sense that they both (attain) rest in the
penetration pertaining to Śiva, who is the Supreme Light. What does not rest
there does not manifest and so would be nothing at all. He says this: ‘indeed,

nothing could exist that is not established in it’. Moreover, what is being said

is that, in this way, the Supreme Light, which is (consciousness) free of thought,
is the means of all these (means). '

This is not just our own idea. Thus, he says:


Jāhrcāaādṁsṣrātaq || 33ē 1I

-aTTTAIJ r̥ATTId fṝō gfrīāq |

saṁvittiphalabhic cātra na prakalpyety ato ‘bravīt || 226 ||
kalpanāyāś ca mukhyatvam atraiva kila sūcitam |
This is why (the Lord) has said that ‘“one should not imagine that
there is (any) difference here in the fruit which is consciousness (attained
by applying oneself to the various means of realisation).” Imagination

(kalpanā)

(that conceives

these

supposed differences) is indicated

(implicitly) here (in this same verse) as being the predominant factor (that
leads people to suppose that they exist). (226cd-227ab)
‘This is why’, because (all the means lead to) entry into one (and the
same) consciousness, which is free of thought constructs. That is said (in the

Mālinīvījayottara):

‘The wise should not imagine that there is any difference here in the

fruit which is consciousness.”"®

'' In other words, the basis of all the means to realisation, by virtue of which they are

effective, is the Divine Means (śāmbhavopāya). This is because it is essentially pure,
perpetually expanding consciousness, apart from which nothing could exist.
'!“’ MV 2/25ab. Also quoted below TĀv ad 5/155 (5/154), introductory remarks below

to 13/1 20/34 and 34/3. This line comes just after the definition of the three kinds of
penetrations that are, according to Abhinava, the basis of the three categories of means
that draw their names from them (quoted above, 1/168-170). Maheśvarānanda

comments that the placement of this line there affirms at a stroke that the fruit of all the
means are at an equal level (MM p. 141). Abhinava frequently stresses this view,

TANTRĀLOKA

Here (in this case), the notion that there is a difference between the

fruits has come about in this way (tāva1) because the means are many.
Otherwise, that would not be possible here, because (the notion that the fruits
are many) is based on the prior appropriation of (thought, which is) what has

been prohibited. This is what is implied by saying that (the wise) ‘should not

imagineʼ, and so he says that ‘imagination (kalpanā) (that conceives these

supposed differences) is the ‘predominant factor’ which is being discussed.

Itis ‘indicated’, not stated directly. This is the point.

Not only here (in this view), but also according to other schools which
are outside (and not part of our own), (the ultimate) rest (of all enquiry and
seeking) takes place in (the state of consciousness) free of thought constructs.

Accordingly, he says:


feakcā

-N 1 20
11|
iEea¢PaA'EIIEīEeegbṭa|Ḷṟṣ
vikalpāpekṣayā yo ʻpi prāmāṇyaṁ prāha tanmate || 227 ||
tadvikalpakramopāttanirvikalpapramāṇatā |

Even he who says that the (assessment of) the validity of knowledge
(free of thought constructs) depends on thought, in that view (also), the

validity of knowledge that is free of thought constructs is attained by means

of a series of thoughts.""' (227cd-228ab)

Even in the view of the Vaibhāṣika Buddhiṣṭs and others who maintain
that (the assessment of) the validity of knowledge free of thought constructs
depends on thought, the validity of (knowledge) free of thought constructs is
‘attained’, that is, brought about, by a series of particular (te ca te) thought

constructs. The meaning is that (ultimate) rest in (the state of consciousness)

free of thought constructs (comes about) by the (progressive) development of
thought.

He gives an example of that:


Concluding Summary of the Three Means

TGTTTaHĪRÇTĪRTTTITTTTHTTT |I/ 22¢ 11

c-ā]
'̃ vvar
ai|

ratnatattvam avidvān prāṅniścayopāyacarcanāt || 228 ||
anupāyāvikalpāptau ratnajña iti bhaṇyate |
namely, that all means to realisation lead to the attainment of Anuttara, which in his

exegetical perspective is the consciousness to which the MV is referring to here, even
though there is no mention of Anuttara anywhere in the MV.

'! See above, 1/180 and 191. C. below, 4/2-12.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


(Take for example the case) of a person who at first does not know

the true nature (and value) of a gem. By deliberating (carcana) (on its

worth) by (a series of conceptual) means to assess it (niścayopāya), he is
(finally) said to be one who knows (the nature and value of) the gem when
(a state of consciousness) that is free of thought and requires no (further)

means (anupāya) is attained. (228cd-229ab)

12 Above (1/184cd-185ab) Abhinava has given the example of an expert jeweller who

assesses the value of a gem in an instant to illustrate how the Divine Means

(śāṃmbhavopāya) operates. Here he gives the example of one who is not so
accomplished. This jeweller takes time. He needs to think, compare one gem with

another to assess their relative value. He is not sure of their nature and value. A glance
is not enough. This is the way practice proceeds in the Empowered Means, which is

here called ‘the means through certain assessment’ (niścayopāya), as it requires thought

and repeated assessment of the teachings. The jeweller in this case comes to his
conclusion mentally. One who is less skilled needs to test the gem. He needs the support
of outer methods of assessment, just as the practitioner at the Individual (āṇava) level of
practice needs the support of outer ritual or yoga, for example. On the contrary, at the

highest level of practice, not only are outer supports unnecessary, even thought is not
required. The practitioner is on the plane of expanded consciousness, free of thought
constructs, like the skilled jeweller who knows the value of a gem intuitively, directly in

a flash. Similarly, this knowledge flashes pristine and clear, free of all doubts, in the
state of consciousness free of thought constructs which is the Śāmbhava state of the
supreme perceiver. But even though thought intervenes at the other two levels of
practice, the practitioner ultimately reaches the same state of consciousness in which

thought ceases, dissipated by the certainty of correct assessment (niścaya), and so rests
in the same expanding consciousness of the Sāmbhava state. Such is the abiding

condition of a disciple who has attained his teacher’s

state of divine (śāmbhava)

consciousness by the grace of his teacher’s empowering instruction and the scriptures he

has diligently put into practice. To put it another way, the state free of thought
constructs, which is the essential, universal ground of all knowledge and so precedes the
thought constructs through which the specific, individual nature of things comes to be
known, is also present at the end of that process. He who cannot merge into that
expanding state of consciousness at the beginning in an instant has a chance to catch it
at the end, even though it may take much time and effort. But there he need not do
anything. Ultimately, when he is ready, he is spontaneously carried away to the highest
state of consciousness of No Means by simply letting go and allowing insight into the
true nature of reality to spontaneously unfold. He recognises that expanding
consciousness is always there right from the start. It cannot be attained by thought
because it precedes it and is its basis. To put it another way, the basis of all spiritual
discipline is an intuitive certainty, however limited and obscured by thought constructs,
that is, doubts and uncertainties. Without that nobody would even begin to practice. It
arises originally by Śiva’s grace, Who thereby freely chooses to reveal Himself, to
varying degrees, according to the purity of His devotees consciousness, that Śiva has

inspired him to strive for. The development of practice and the ultimate attainment to
which it leads is, from that perspective, the degree in which Śiva’s pure, thought free

consciousness, at rest within itself, expands, permeating and ultimately absorbing all
thought constructs to leave behind in the moment of the supreme act of grace, when the

devotee’s consciousness is completely pure, the complete revelation of Śiva’s own
nature as the aspirant’s true essential nature.

TANTRĀLOKA

A certain jeweller, for example, who does not know the nature (and
value) of a gem initially by (direct assessment) free of thought, deliberates by
means of thoughts such as ‘is such its nature or not?” and so on that basis,
when

(a state of consciousness) that is spontaneous (ṣvārasika), free of
thought and
requires no (further) means (anupāya) (arises), he is said to be one
who knows

(that) gem, knowing (as he does) the true nature of that object, which is free
of
thought constructs. This is the meaning of (this) statement. The same can be

said about one who does not know the individual and other
(means to
realisation).
Here (according to us), cognitive consciousness (jñāna) is of three

kinds, according to whether it is (knowledge of objectivity, which is) duality

(bheda), (that of the means of knowledge, which is) unity-in-differenc
e
(bhedābheda), and (that of the perceiver, which is) nonduality (abheda)
. As is

said:

"!n reality, this essential being of noetic consciousness (jñānasattā)
unfolds in three ways as dual, dual-cum-nondual and, in the same way, endowed

with nonduality.
There

(in

that

context),

the

Individual

(Means)

is

said

to

be

'! Pratyabhijñā terminology is absent, and so does not preclude the possibility that

this

predominantly based on duality, and the EÉmpowered on unity-in-diversity

What then is the (means) pertaining to Śiva based on? With this doubt in mind,
he says:

TTTTITHTT
ĪTTT |I 32¢, |I
abhedopāyam atroktaṁ śāmbhavaṁ śāktam ucyate || 229 |
bhedābhedātmakopāyaṁ bhedopāyaṁ tadāṇavam |

verse may be drawn from a scriptural source. Judging by the content, it appears
that it
was a Triīka Tantra — perhaps the 7riśirobhairava?

'! Even though the three categories of means to realisation operate separately through

the three energies of the will (for the Divine Means), knowledge (for the Empower
ed
Means), and action (for the Indiviḍual Means), they are all equally expansio
ns of the
essential knowledge of the true nature of consciousness. This consciousness is not
just a
passive background on which outer illusory forms are projected, like a cinema
screen or
the canvas on which the artist paints his picture. It is a dynamic consciou
sness that
unfolds in the three domains of the oneness of the perceiver, the plurality of the object,

and the unity-in-difference of the perception which, partaking in the nature of both
at its
extremes, connects the two. This verse tells us how the reflective awareness, which
is

the essential being (sattā) of that Śiva consciousness, unfolds first in the

realm of the

duality of objectivity practicing the Individual Means, that is, the recitation of Mantra,

ritual, āsana, meditation and the like. It then goes on to unfold in the domain
of thought
alone, through the inner practice of the Empowered Means, free of
outer ritual and the

rest. It then finally unfolds spontaneously and without effort, in the domain of
the
perceiver and agent, who is one and the same, whatever be his perception or action.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Here the means pertaining to Śiva (śāmbhava) is said to be that of
unity (abheda). The Empowered means is said to be unity-in-diversity, and

the means (based) on difference is the Individual one." (229cd-230ab)

Surely (one may ask,) according to the teaching that ‘liberation is
conferred by Śiva’s initiation’," (ritual) action, such as initiation, is said to
serve as a means (to liberation). Nowis that some other, separate means, or does
that come to be included somewhere here (in the means based on knowledge)?

With this doubt in mind, he says:


3TdT āls āīṁ aīāāī:; ātaza || Q30||

ante jñāne ‘tra sopāye samastaḥ karmavistaraḥ || 230 ||
prasphuṭenaiva rūpeṇa bhāvī so ‘ntar bhaviṣyati |
The entire extent of (ritual) action, which will be (described

later)," will be included in a clearly evident form in the last form of

! This verse is quoted in MM p. 141. The verse that follows immediately after is said

to be from the otherwise unknown Upāyadviśati (Twenty Verses concerning the

Means). In the following passage in the Mahārthamañjarī, Maheśvarāṇanda presents the

view that all the means to realization are forms of the salvific energy of Śiva and that
belong to one or other of these three categories according to the degree its intensity.
iti Śrītantrālokopāyadviśatyādinītyā prāṇaspandoccāraṇādyaśuddhavikalpa
āṇavaḥ | cittamātra-nirvartyaśuddhavikalpātmā śāktaḥ | vikalpasarvavilayasvabhāvaḥ
šśāmbhava iti trividhe 'pyupāyatattve sthūlas
nāditāratamyayogena śaktyullekhasya
sarvatrāpyanusyūtiḥ | śākte tu tasyā aulbaṇyamātrād utkarṣa ity anusandheyam | yad

uktam -

sā śaktir āṇavaiḥ śāktaiḥ śāmbhavaiś ca tridhoditaiḥ |
upāyaiḥ śīvam ābhāsya svasṛṣṭair mocayaty amiūn ||
‘According to the teachings of the venerable Tantrāloka and the Upāyadviśati
(there are three categories of means to realisation. One is) the Individual Means, which
consists of impure thought constructs centred on the cyclic pulse of the breath and (its)
upward motion etc. The Empowered One consists of pure thought constructs effected by
the mind alone. The Divine Oneis the complete dissolving away of thought constructs.
Thus, although the means to realisation is of three kinds, the manifestation of Śakti

threads through it everywhere in association with the hierarchy of gross, subtle (and

supreme) etc. Thus, one should contemplate the excellence within the empowered state
as being due solely to the developing strength of that (power of grace). As is said:

‘That power illuminates Śiva by the (many) individual, empowered and divine

means that have arisen threefold as its own emanations, and having done so, liberates
these (fettered souls).’ MM p. 141
! MV 4/8d. Also quoted below in TĀv ad 2/40.

'! From Chapter Fifteen onwards.

TANTRĀLOKA

knowledge (listed) here," along with its means (that is, the Individual

Means). (230cd-231ab)

‘Along with its means’, that is, along with means (to realisation), such

as the utterance (of Mantra) and the like associated with (the Individual Means).
This is the meaning. Thus it was said before that (present) there ‘along with its

meansʼ is the ‘entire extent of (ritual) action’, that is, the wonderful variety of
(rites of) initiation and the like that make up the assembly of (ritual) action

which will be explained (from Chapter Fifteen onwards) and ‘will be included’
(in this means). It is indicated by (saying) this that (ritual) is not a different and
separate (independent) means.
Surely (one may ask,) it is reasonable (to maintain) that what is

included in something of a particular type is of the same type, not otherwise. So
how can (ritual) action, such as (the rite of) initiation, be included in knowledge

of the individual (means)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

-āTcāT 1| 3 32 1A

kriyā hi nāma vijñānān nānṅyad vastu kramātmatām || 231 1|
upāyavaśataḥ prāptaṁ tat kriyeti puroditam |
Action is not something different from knowledge; (rather it is
knowledge itself) which, in order to serve as a means to realisation, has
assumed the nature of a succession (krama) (of processes and ritual

actions). It was said before that that is action." (231cd-232ab)

‘That’ knowledge (is action,) as was said before with the words

beginning with: ‘because action does not differ (from knowledge).” ”

'' One of Abhinava's primary concerns in writing the Tantrāloka is the exposition of

the rites of his Anuttara Trika. Accordingly, he refers to it as a liturgical manual
(paddhati) (above 1/14). The function of the rites performed by those who seek
liberation (mmumukṣu) is the final removal of the Impurity which prevents its realisation.
We have noted that this Impurity is understood by the Siddhānta to be a material
substance (dravya), whereas here it is understood to be essentially ignorance. Thus, as
Sanderson observes (2006: 46): ‘if ritual is to be a means to liberation at all its purpose
can no longer be discovered in the fact that it is concrete action as opposed to mere
knowledge [as the Siddhānta maintains]. Since Impurity has been dematerialized, ritual

must work on ignorance itself; and to do this it must be a kind of knowing.’ The same
logic also holds good for the practice of Yoga. Whether this involves the outer physical

activity of the body or the subtler inner movement of the manifold forms of the breath or
even the practice of concentration, it is a form of action. So this too, in order to be
liberating must be understood as leading to liberating knowledge (see above 1/150).

! Saṇḍderson (2006: 47) explains: ‘A substratum of action in the concrete sphere of

indiviḍualized consciousness supports the process of awareness and enables it to
develop in intensity.”

''" Above, 1/150a. Abhinava is quoting there from the Gamatantra. The three means to

realisation can also be understood in terms of the form and degree of succession (krama)


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

Surely (one may ask,) by such (statements) as ‘knowledge is the sole

cause of liberation’,"™ it has been declared that liberation (comes) from

knowledge. Thus (the question arises as to whether knowledge is) liberating by
virtue of its own (inherent) competence (svādhikaraṇa) (to be s0), or is (this)
competence derived from something else (parādhikaraṇa)? ĪIf it is its own
(inherent) competence, then is it liberating whether initiation has taken place or
not? If not, then according to the dictum: “there is no competence to practice

Saiva Yoga without initiation,"" there is no competence (adhikāra) to acquire

or, as I translate here, ‘progressive advance’, which takes place within that domain of
practice. Thus, the Divine Means (śāmbhavopāya), which is centred on the immediacy
of self-awareness, progresses, as we have seen, spontaneously in a moment and so is
non-successive (akrama). The other two categories of Means progress successively. The

progressive development in the domains of the Empowered Means is in the way we
think about things — what we believe they and we ourselves are. All levels and forms of
practice for spiritual development are about expanding consciousness and growing in

wisdom and insight. The Empowered Means is centred on perception and so unfolds
without outer supports. As it is inward in this way, the succession, that is, step by step
development (krama), takes place hand in hand with insight into the pure consciousness
which is always full and perfect. Ultimately, this is recognised to be the process (krama)

of the dynamism of consciousness itself, which cannot be said to be either a process,
which would make it temporal, or not because, inactive, it would not be consciousness.
Such is the activity within the domain of the Empowered Means, namely, the activity of
perception (jñāna). A step down from the domain of the subtle, indeed, ultimately

indefinable process of perception and the formation of thought constructs that
accompanies it, the reflective awareness of consciousness flows into the domain of the
Individual Means, in which the power of the will in the domain of the Divine Means and
that of knowledge in that of the Empowered Means issue out into the power of action.
Here the inscrutable dynamism of consciousness ~ the supreme form of action — which,

by the freedom of its own will, has formed itself first into perception ~ ‘knowledge’ —
assumes the form of gross outer action that, operating through the psychophysical
organism, extends through time. Sentient and consciously directed, it functions as Yoga
which finds its ultimate completion in the union (yoga) of all things within

consciousness.

'"" Above, 1/22d.
'! MV 4/6cd. This important line is paraphrased by Abhinava in 8/193ab (192cd). He

quotes it directly twice in 15/5ab and in 16/291ab (16/291) as does Jayaratha in TĀv ad
1/231cd-232ab (232), 4/42cd-43ab, 8/191-193 (190cd-193ab), and the introduction to
8/210-212 (209cd-212ab). Note that Abhinava himself seems to distinguish between
meditative practice and ritual. At the very beginning of his exposition of Trika ritual in

his Tantrāsāra, he declares that it is only if one wishes to perform these rituals that
initiation is necessary. The sense of the term ‘yoga’ is not clearly defined in the Tantras.
There ‘yoga’ may also be used as a term to denote ritual, although one would expect
them to be opposites. The sense of this identification is that certain rituals unite one with

the deity, and ‘union’ is the meaning of the word ‘yoga’. White (2009: 73 ff) argues that

the earliest use of the term ‘yogayukta’, which we would nowadays translate as
‘engaged in Yoga’, was to be hitched up to one’s chariot. We have already noted the

symbolic importance of the chariot for early Vedic ritualists (see above, note 1,46).

Ritual action from that perspective was a ‘yoking upʼ, that is, ‘Yoga’.

Again, from another perspective, the process of purification, which is a basic

requirement for ritual action, can be understood as Yoga. The worshiper should be as

pure as is the deity he is worshipping. Indeed, all that is offered, the ritual implements,

TANTRĀLOKA

knowledge, and so what would be liberating and who (would be liberated)? If
(initiation) does take place, then (knowledge) would be (inherently) dependent
on something else within its own nature, and so initiation could not logically
serve as an instrumental cause (of knowledge), for if the competence (of

knowledge to liberate) were to depend on something else, (the contingency

would arise that realization is brought about by some external cause). (Thus,)

the cause (which is ritual action) is in one place (i.e. outside the ritual agent),

and its effect (which is knowledge) would be in another (i.e. within him). Is this

not a great defect (in this view)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Teacher and His Spiritual Family

qTTJĪĪ ] TTTJRGAIU] TGTṬĒĒTTT || 332/II

samyagjñānaṁ ca muktyekakāraṇaṁ svaparasthitam || 232 ||

yato hi kalpanāmātraṁ svaparādivibhūtayaḥ |

Right knowledge (samyagjñāna) is the sole cause of liberation, and

it is present (both) in oneself (that is, in the teacher) and in the other (that

is, in the disciple), because the manifestation (vibhūti) of ‘sel’, ‘other’ and
the like is only imagination (kalpanāmātra). (232cd-233ab)

(The manifestation of ‘self’ and ‘other’) ‘is only imagination’. The
intended sense is that in reality there is only one consciousness that shines

radiantly as each manifestation of ‘self’ and ‘otherʼ.

the representations of the deity and all else that is involved in its worship should be

pure. Although the process by which the worshipper is purified involves the repetition

of mantra and ritual gestures that are ‘external’, it is an ‘inner’ process. It is ‘imner’ in

the sense that it takes place within the yogic body through the internal movement of the

breath and its vital energy. It is, in other words, a yogic process. t is, moreover, what

takes place in the course of initiation. Initially induced by the teacher during initiation, it
is subsequently practiced by the initiate alone. This is a cardinal example of how outer

ritual action is related to Kaula Yoga. The rise of Kuṇḍalinī, the piercing of the centres
and the purification this brings about leading to liberation prepare the way for the most
excellent and perfect worship of deity. As this ideally takes place when the worshipper
is fully purified and hence liberated by the practice of Yoga, it is not surprising that
many traditions came to reject the need for outer ritual. The logic behind this rejection
in this case is not that liberation can only be attained by knowledge, as, for example, the
Advaita Vedānta maintains, or that rituals are in themselves powerless because what is
required is devotion, as the later Bhakti schools maintain. Both these positions also
reject the practice of Yoga, the first because it is a form of action and the second
because devotion is by itself enough to draw the deitys liberating grace.

'!” Liberation is not attained by the disciple’s own efforts or, indeed, by those of the
teacher. Liberation can only be attained by knowing the true nature of the one reality,
which is the same pervasive consciousness manifest as and within all things, which is
thus the essential nature of both the teacher and the disciple. The difference between
them is quite real as manifestations of consciousness, but it is just the notion of one’s


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Accordingly, he says:


: || 3331I
N
TETTT
Tā’ WTRNTṀ

tulye kālpanikatve ca yadaikyasphuraṇātmakaḥ || 233 ||
guruḥ sa tāvad ekātmā siddho muktaś ca bhaṇyate |
As (the notions of ‘self’ and ‘other’) are equally imaginary
(kālpanika), the teacher, who is the radiant manifestation of oneness
(aikyasphuraṇa) (with the disciples who are one with him), is thus (tāvat)

one in nature (with them) and (as such,) is said to be ‘accomplished’

(siddha) and ‘liberated’. (233cd-234ab)

The notion of ‘self’ and ‘other” in relation to who is the teacher and who
is not etc. are the same (because both are equally just notions), thus the oneness

with the disciple (of the teacher) or with the teacher (of the disciple) makes
them one. (But even so, the resultant) reflective awareness which, because it is
devoid of the division of the manifestation of ‘self’ and ‘other’ etc. and (its)

effulgent manifestation, is as one compact consciousness, is the teacher whose

nature is that.'" (That) is (the teacher’s) nature and he is, to that extent (as the
unity of the teacher and disciple is realized), the (ultimate) limit of the
manifestation of oneness (as both become one as the teacher), his one (all-

encompassing) Self, which being such, is ‘accomplished and liberated’; (and
these) are said to be (the accomplishment and freedom) of the supreme lordship

(of Śiva consciousness) alone. This is the meaning.'

This is what is being said: to the degree in which (one’s own) reflective
awareness is in a state of oneness with one’s own consciousness, this oneness of
the Supreme Light which has (thus) been attained and is just one, manifests.


That is said (in the following verse):


own identity as the disciple distinct from that of the ‘other’, that is, the teacher. If the
disciple recognises that that one, universal Śiva consciousness shines within the teacher,

he will recognise that it shines within himself also. In the same way, if he experiences it
within himself, he will experience it within the teacher. Indeed, he may experience it

directly within Śiva even independently of the teacher and so recognise it to be the same

in all things, living and inanimate. But, as the next verse stresses, the one consciousness
is first experienced as that of the teacher who assumes both aspects of teacher and the

taught — Siva and the individual soul.

!"- AIthough both the teacher and the disciple are equally that one undivided

consciousness, even so, that unitary consciousness is manifest as the teacher, not as the
disciple.

'"” He indeed is a true teacher who sees himself as one with his disciples, just as the

true disciple is one who sees himself as one with his teacher. The two are the Light of
consciousness which is aware of itself as the unity of both. This is the teacher’s

Supreme Lordship, that is, status and state as Śiva Himself.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘He who knows the pervasion (of consciousness) in this way, as divided

into ʻthe other” and (himself as) ‘not the other’ (parāpara), īs Śiva, the

supreme cause (of all things) directly visible (sākṣār), and is (the teacher) who
liberates (from bondage).”

Thus, he says:


a]Ta

aitd-: |1 33% 1|

TTTTTTAJĪT
ITT TFTTÑ TT; |

yāvān asya hi saṁtāno gurus tāvat sa kīrtitaḥ || 234 ||
samyagjñānamayaś ceti svātmanā mucyate tataḥ |
tata eva svasaṁtānaṁ jñãnĩ tãrayatītyadaḥ || 235 ||
yuktyāgamābhyāṁ saṁsiddhaṁ tāvān eko yato muniḥ |

A teacher is said to be as great as is his (spiritual) family (saṅtāna),
and if (that) is made of right knowledge (samyagjñāna), he therefore

liberates

himself (when

a

member

of this

spiritual

family

attains

liberation). " Thus (the saying) that starts (with the words): ‘the man of

knowledge liberates his own spiritual family’ is fully proved both by reason
(yukti) and scripture (āgama), for such is the extent of (just) one (true) sage.

(234cd-236ab) (235-236)

A ‘spiritual family’, which consists of disciples and their disciples etc.,
is such because, to the degree in which it manifests as being of that nature
(tāvadātmatvena),' it is the manifestation of that one (consciousness which is
both teacher and disciple). “Thus’, because such is the (extent and nature of a)
spiritual family. Taking one’s support from a spiritual family, which is such,
because of the oneness of consciousness, (all that there is just) this one

teacher.'""N Thus, just as the members of the family are liberated, (the teacher)
‘liberates himself’. As the division between ‘self’ and ‘other’ is (just)

conceptual (kālpanika), there is nothing wrong (with this view). Accordingly, he

'' One could also translate: ‘as divided into supreme (transcendent) and other
(immanent) or the ‘supreme’ pure principles above Māyā and the inferior impure
principles below it.

'"” Concerning the spiritual family, see below, 28/194-212.
'' One could also translate: ‘to the degree in which it manifests as the Self’.

'!” It seems that there is a teacher and his disciples, but as their consciousness is one, all

that there is just the teacher alone. The lineage of teachers and their disciples is in reality

just a stream of the one consciousness which manifests this way from one generation to
the other of teachers. Thus, in reality there is only one teacher, and that is Śiva

consciousness, which realises itself and illumines others from one generation to the

next. Accordingly, as long as his disciples are not liberated, the teacher is also not fully
liberated, and by liberating them he liberates himself.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


says: ‘and so (the man of knowledge) liberates (his own spiritual family)’.

That is said (in the following verse):

‘By fully knowing the teaching (jñāna) and what is to be known, the
teacher will save everybody of his own people as well as thousands of millions
of (other spiritual) families.”

The reason here for this is ‘for such is the extent of (just) one (true)

sageʼ. The ‘sage’ is the teacher. As this is so, the removal of the defect
mentioned by others is effortlessly accomplished. Accordingly, he says:

JTIT āT TSTT āTSNÑ

fJ̄īsrq 11 339 1|

aīī] vaftc Tāq |
zT roa: fī araār āafāaṉ 11 23 c 1

tenātra ye codayanti nanu jñānād vimuktatā || 236 ||
dīkṣādikā kriyā ceyaṁ sā kathaṁ muktaye bhavet|
jñānātmā seti cejjñānaṁ yatrasthaṁ taṁ vimocayet || 237 ||
anyasya mocane vāpi bhavet kiṁ nāsamañjasam |
iti te mūlataḥ kṣiptā yattvatrānyaiḥ samarthitam || 238 ||
Thus, (by accepting that the teacher and his disciples are essentially
the same pure conscious reality), those others (who) maintain and promote
(the following view) have been refuted from the very root (of their
contention): Surely, (they object), the liberated state is due to knowledge, so
how can (ritual) action such as initiation be liberating? If you say (that
action is essentially) knowledge, then it would (only) liberate the one in
whom it is present. Would it not (therefore) be unsound (to maintain that)
it (serves to) liberate someone else also?” (236cd-238) (237-238)
‘Those? who maintain various kinds of dualist views and make these
objections have been ‘refutedʼ, that is, completely refuted ‘from the very
rootʼ, as we accept that knowledge and action are one and that the division

between ‘self’ and ‘other’ is (only) imaginary. That itself is the (correct)

response here (to this objection), no other." He says this (with the words)
'! If ṭhe teacher and disciple were to be really fundamentally different, how could the
teacher whose consciousness is perfectly full and free communicate his enlightened
condition to the disciple whose consciousness is, on the contrary, contracted and bound?
Initiation or any other procedure, whether outer ritual or inner meditation, could not
serve as a means to transfer the knowledge the teacher has to his disciple. For this to be
possible, their most fundamental conscious nature must be essentially identical. The
same holds good in relation to Śiva Himself, with whom the teacher is one. Just as the
disciple should assume the teacher’s own divine, free nature, so too, conversely, the
teacher assumes the limitations of his disciple, but without losing awareness of his true,

TANTRĀLOKA

‘those who’ ((make the following) objection have been refuted). The ‘others’,
(who) are described as those who are the votaries of dualist theism

(bhedaiśvaravādin)," we will refute further ahead. This is the connected

(sense of these verses).

Surely (one may ask,) if one does not accept what the dualists say,
namely, that the impurity (that sullies and binds the soul) is a substance, then
what is it? With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Removal of Impurity and the Four Forms of Knowledge

vs ī fa zaā #īāaōītēaq1

TīTTGTTTTĪTTĪ] JTTATTHṬTITRTT |

ā zxīfaxaāīṁ fēatrg 1| 2x0 1
malo nāma kila dravyaṁ cakṣuḥsthapaṭalādivat |
tadvihantrī kriyā dīkṣā tv añjanādikakarmavat || 239 ||
tat purastān niṣetsyāmo yuktyāgamavigarhitam ḷ
malamāyākarmaṇāṁ ca darśayiṣyāmahe sthitim || 240 ||
(The dualist Śaivasiddhāntin maintains that spiritual) Impurity
(mala) is a material substance (dravya) (that covers the soul) as does, for
example, a cataract the eye, and that initiation is the action that removes it,

just as the act of applying collyrium and the like (removes cataracts).
Further on we shall refute that (view), which is contrary to both reason and
scripture, and explain the (true) condition of (āṇava) Mala, Karma and

Māyā. (239.240)

He concludes as he sows the seed for more (teachings).

zag |

T® Tzk TaTTÑTTTĪRTT |I 3¢ 1I
evaṁ śaktitrayopāyaṁ yaj jñānaṁ tatra paścimam |
mūlaṁ taduttaraṁ madhyam uttarottaram ādimam || 241 ||

divine free consciousness. The sense of difference between the disciple and the teacher
as oneself and someone else is a false notion.

'!! Theṣe are, for example, the dualist Śaivasiddhāntins, who maintain that Śiva, the

Lord (pati), the individual fettered souls (pasu) and the three-fold Impurity (mala) that
binds them (pāśa) are three separate realities. The first two are consciousness. The last
is understood by them to be a material substance (dravya).

'! See above, note to 1/23.
'! See below, 9/62 ff.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Such is the means to realisation, which consists of the three powers
(of will, knowledge and action). The root of these is the last form of
knowledge (that is, the Individual Means). The middle (Empowered Means)

is higher than that, the first (the Supreme Means) is higher still."

‘The lastʼ is the Individual (Means), which is ‘the root’, and its (place
of) rest is in the (Means) pertaining to Śiva (attained) by the progressive
development (krama) of the Empowered (Means). He says that ‘higher than
that’ Individual (Means) is the Empowered Means, which is higher and more
because it is the place of rest (of the Individual Means). Higher than the

Empowered one also is the (Means) pertaining to Śiva. As is said:


‘The penetration that takes place because of the relationship

(saṁbandha) of the pervasive Lord’s power with the individual soul is said to

be three-fold because it is linked with (the powers of) will, knowledge and
action, and so accumuḷates at (correspondingly) progressively higher (levels).”

As the abode of rest of the Individual and other (means), the

knowledge pertaining to Śiva’s means is not the only most excellent one, for
there is another one apart from that called No Means (which is beyond it). Thus,

he says:

TTĀTĪTFHATTTṬTTTTGTATĪ |I 3%+2 II
tato ʻpi paramaṁ jñānam upāyādivivarjitam |
ānandaśaktiviśrāntam anuttaram ihocyate || 242 ||

Superior to that is the knowledge free of means and all else." It

rests in the power of bliss and is called here Anuttara (the Absolute).

(The means called Anuttara — the Absolute) is ‘superior’ because it is

one with the goal. Thus, it is said to be ‘free of means and all else’ and so it is
said that ‘it rests in the power of bliss’. The (powers of) the will (knowledge
and action) are directed externally because they are conditioned by their object
of desire (knowledge and action), and so it is also possible for duality (to arise),

whereas in the case of the power of bliss, according to the dictum: °bliss is the

'! See below, Chapter Thirty-Four.

'! We have seen that the pure consciousness, free of thought constructs, which is ‘the

knowledge pertaining to Śiva’s meansʼ, is the basis of all practice in any domain at all
levels, but there is a level still higher than that where there is nothing the disciple needs
to do. Purified by the practice of the means to realisation, he attains liberation by Śiva’s
supreme grace, transmitted through the teacher. This, the supreme state of
consciousness, is the goal which cannot be attained by any means, and so is called No
Means (anupāya).

" This is taught in Chapter Two below.

TANTRĀLOKA

nature of the Brahman’," that is the very nature of consciousness, and so there
is not (even) the scent of a means (to realisation) here. This is the meaning.'

And this is not (just) our own idea, rather it is declared everywhere in

the scriptures. Thus, he says:

% |

II

tat ṣvaprakāśaṁ vijñānaṁ vidyāvidyeśvarādibhiḥ |
api durlabhasadbhāvaṁ śrīsiddhātantra ucyate || 243 ||
mālinyāṁ sūcitaṁ caitat paṭale ʻṣṭādaśe sphuṭam |
na caitad aprasannena śaṅkareṇeti vākyataḥ || 244 ||
ity anenaiva pāṭhena mālinīvijayottare |

'" This citation is quoted again below in TĀv ad 1/242, ad 3/71 (71cd-72ab), 3/92cd93ab, 4/139, ad 28/332ab, ad 29/97cd-98ab, and ad 29/127cd-128ab. Cf. 29/97cd.
Although this is not a direct reference from the Upaniṣads, it states a view that is clearly

meant to echo them, as the term Brahman indicates. Thus, we find the statement in

Taittirīyopaniṣad 3/6/1: ānando brahmeti vyajānāt — ‘He knew bliss to be the

Brahman.” The text continues: ‘for from bliss, indeed, all these beings originate; once

born they are sustained by bliss; they move towards and merge in bliss’. Also according
to BrŪp 9/7/I: nityaṁ vijñānam ānandaṁ brahma
- ‘the Brahman is eternal

consciousness and blissʼ.
The word ‘ānanda’ is liṣted in standard lexicons as a masculine noun and that

is how it appears consistently in all these citations. However, in other sources where this

statement is found, it is treated as neuter. Thus, we find the form ānandaṁ brahmaṇo

rūpam in the commentary on the PMNKā ad Kārikā 49. A note (49.78) to the edition by
Watson et al further locates this reference in Parākhyatantra 14/89b (see also Goodall
2004: 378, fn. 827). Cf. Bhāsarvajña in the Nyāyasāra p. 565: ānandaṁ brahmaṇo
rūpam tac ca mokṣe ‘bhivyajyate (‘bliss is the nature of the Brahman and that is made
manifest at the time of liberation’). It is also quoted as scripture by Sucaritamiśra ad
Ślokavārttīka, śūnyavāda 70 (p. 130). Cf. also Tantrasadbhāva 1/295cd: ānandaṁ
brahmaṇo rūpam na vibheti kadācana (bliss is the nature of the Brahman, (he who
knows this) is never frightened’). Wilson er al note that ‘This is in turn very close to
Tattirīyopaniṣat in 2/4 and 2/9: ānandaṁ brahmaṇo vidvān na vibheti kadācana (‘bliss
is the Brahman, a wise man is never frightenedʼ).

! No Means — Anupāya — is essentially the power of the bliss of consciousness

(ānandaśakti). Bliss is both the wonder (camatkāra) consciousness experiences by

reṣting in its own nature and the union of Śiva and Śakti from which pour forth the

energies of emanation. All the other powers of will, knowledge and action are, to a
greater or lesser degree, directed outwards from subjective consciousness towards
objectivity, whereas Bliss (ānanda) is the inner nature of the Absolute, which is the one
reality without a second called Brahman, because it pervades and nourishes its
emanation by its oneness with it.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


That consciousness which is self-illuminating and whose true nature

is hard to attain even by Vidyās and Vidyeśvaras etc." is taught in the
venerable Siddhātantra (i.e. the Siddhayogīśvarīmata) and clearly
indicated in the eighteenth chapter of the Mālinī, that is, with this very

reading in the Mālinīvijayottara" stating: ‘Śaṅkara does not (teach) this
(if) He is not pleased!” (243-245ab)

There (we read):'”
‘O Lord of Yoga, the most excellent of those who know Yoga, I want to
hear (about) the Yoga which, without means (anupāya) and devoid of effort and
exertion, (bears) great fruit.
'" Theṣe are the Mantra and Mantreśvara subjects who, beyond Māyā, experience the
principles of Pure Knowledge and Īśvara, respectively. See below, 9/53cd-55ab and
15/309-312.
"! Concerning the Siddhayogīśvarīmata, which is the earliest Tantra that teaches rites
and Mantras to worship the Trika trīad of goddesses, Parā, Parāparā and Aparā in the
Trika Trident Maṇḍala, see Appendix concerning the sources of the Tantrāloka.
Itis very doubtful that the SYM taught immediate realisation, and certainly not

Anuttara directly. Abhinava uses this reference to consciousness as ‘self-illuminating’ to

support his concept of Anuttara, which he had already elaborated in great detail in the
PTy as complete and perfect subjectivity (pūrnāhantā), Supreme Speech and Trika
itself. Quoting the SYM and then the MV as stating this, he is backed by the highest

Trika authorities.

!! Abhinava quotes and comments at length on MV 18/74-81 below in 4/213cd-278 to

establish that relative distinctions such as ‘pure’ and ‘impure’ are merely conceptual.
Here indeed, in Chapter Eighteen, the teaching of the MV is clearly nondualist, whereas
elsewhere in the MV, it may be argued that it is not necessarily so. But even so, this
‘nondualismʼ between pure and impure may not necessarily have ontological

implications. When Tantras teach rites which involve the offering of meat and other
substances considered ‘impure, and declare that they are votaries of ‘supreme
nondualismʼ (paramādvaya), it is generally in this sense.

! The following passages are not found in the printed edition of the MV but are

certainly drawn from there.

! This verse is also quoted in the ĪPVV 3, p. 401. Abhinava does not tell us its source,

but he introduces it saying: “As liberation (is attained) by recognition (pratyabhijīñā)
alone, Yoga consisting of the impediments (kleśa) of yama and niyama (and its other

limbs) is of no use here. Abhinava discusses how only the direct insight into the nature
of reality, namely, that ‘I am all this and all this am I˚, which is termed Sound
Reasoning (sartarka), serves as a means to realisation (see below, 4/13 ff., especially
verses 87 to 97). He finds scriptural support for this teaching from the MV (see below,

4/15, with reference to MV 17/18-19). Thus, it is quite possible that although these

verses are not found in the printed edition of the MV, they come from there, as is the
case with another lost verse from the MV recorded in the PTv (p. 183). This is the
opinion of Tōrzsók (1999: 217). It is unlikely that these verses are drawn from the
SYM, if the recension we have of the SYM is representative of the recension known to

Abhinava and Jayaratha. This SYM is practically entirely concerned with ritual,
whereas the MV is focused much more on Yoga. Again, references in the Tantras in

general to No Means are very rare. Indeed, this is the only one presented by the

Kashmiri teachers as being found in a Trika Tantra. However, the reading of the first
line is not sure. The same verse quoted in the ĪPVv omits the reference to anupāya. Here

TANTRĀLOKA


Asked by the goddess, (Lord Śiva replies,) beginning with (the words):

‘0 goddess, listen, I will tell (you about) the most excellent nectar of

Yoga, having obtained which mortals, free of effort, attain Śiva’s

state. Śaṅkara

does not teach this (if) He is not pleased. Even if it is obtained" in some way,

no trace of it arises (in the aspirant’s mind).”
‘Therefore, one should practice that constantly with a mind that is
not
indifferent (to attaining the goal). O goddess, that is emission (visarga), where

one should find rest." That is said to be the teacher’s mouth. It is said to be the

Wheel of Energies. That is the most excellent place from which all Mantras
arise.”
work:

He (now) says that this is the purpose (and sense — artha — of this)

THa TīdT| T-JIṀĪĒ-TT
TITTĀT|
iti jīīāānacatuṣkaṁ yat siddhimuktimahodayam || 246 ||
tanmayā tantryate tantrālokanāmny atra śāsane |

the reading is: anāyāsam anārambhaṃ anupāyaṁ mahāphalam — (the
Yoga which,)
without means (anupāya) and, devoid of effort and exertion, (bears)
great fruit.’ The

reading in the IPVv is: sphuṭopāyam anāyāsam anārambhaṁ mahāphalam. (the Yoga
which is) a clear means, and, devoid of effort and exertion, (bears) great fruit.”

"" In ĪPVV 3, p. 401 the reading is upalabdhe (‘if it is obtainedʼ), as it is

Kṣemarāja (commenting on ŚSu 2/10) reads upadiṣṭe (‘if it is taught’).

here, but

'" After quoting this verse in ĪPVv 3, p. 401 Abhinava goes on to quote the

following verse:

‘The Yogas with limbs, including breath control (prāṇāyāma) and the rest,
are
(human) creations and so are not worth even a sixteenth part of (the
true) uncreated

(Yoga).”

He continues saying: “although described in this way in the secret
scriptures, it
is not stated clearly in this way, rather it is described concisely (in a
veiled manner). He

then goes on to quote the following verse which says:

‘Even if when he attains just (this) trace (of attainment) and does
not become
(foolishly) elated (pramatta), the Vināyakas (who create obstacle
s) conjoin him to
transitory worldly benefits (bhoga) (and so (he) cannot attain liberatio
n).”

! The verse which contains this and the following sentence is quoted

by Abhinava in

the PTv p. 182. There instead of viṣrāntim arhai, i.e. “(where) one
should find restʼ, the
textreads viśrāntim ṛcchati, i.e. ‘(where) it gives restʼ.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

Here in this teaching called the Light of (and on) the Tantras

(Tantrāloka), I expound this four-fold knowledge, which is the great

dawning of accomplishment (siddhi) and liberation.”” (246cd-247ab)

(Itis) as if there is within the Tantrāloka the light (āloka) of the Tantras
of the Supreme Lord, or else (one can says that) it is the light (āloka) which

illumines them." What is the four-fold knowledge, the nature of which has

been described? It is the dawning (of realisation,) which is the great arising ‘of
accomplishment (siddhi) and liberation’ within this (Tantrāloka). (I) expound
and extensively illumine here in the teaching (called) Tantrāloka, this Great

Dawning (of Realisation). This is the meaning."

” Here Abhinava is referring to his own Tantrāloka as an authority to support the

validity of his presentation of the four penetrations (samāveśa), which are descents of

power of grace which is Rudraśakti as four forms of knowledge that are essentially the

atṭainment of Anuttara, that is, Trika and the means to it. He is also telling us that these
four constitute his basic exegetical model that accommodates all the practices, whether
they be in the form of ritual, Yoga, or direct insight and combinations of them.

! According to the first way of breaking down the compound ‘tantrāloka’, it means

‘Light of the Tantrasʼ, and according to the other way it means ‘Light on the Tantras’.
Jayaratha says that these are alternative, equally valid way of understanding the
meaning of the name ‘Tantrāloka.

"!” In the second half of his summary of this chapter presented in the first chapter of his

Tantrasāra (see above note 1,533 for the first half), Abhinava again focuses our

atṭention on the ‘four-fold knowledge’, which consists of the levels and categories of

means (upāya) and corresponding meditative penetrations (samāvesśa), as the essence of
his teachings:
‘There (in that regard,) here (according to us, the essential) ‘own nature’ (of

every single thing) is that which, above all, should be adopted (as one’s own)

(paramopādeya), and that is the nature of all existing things as the Light (of
consciousness), because it is illogical that that which is not light (i.e. does not manifest
anywhere at any time or in any form can) possess a nature of its own. And that (light) is
not multiple, for there is no difference (bheda) between the ‘own nature’ (of things),
insofar as it is not logically possible (for the Light) to enter into (and assume) a nature

which is other than (itself). Again, space and time also do not divide it up, because they

too are that light (of consciousness) by nature. Thus, the Light (which makes all things
manifest) is indeed only one, and that is itself consciousness. (Indeed,) nobody disagrees
here that consciousness is the Light (that illumines all) things (arthaprakāśa). And that

Light does not depend on anything else (for its existence and illumination). The state of

dependence on another (pertains only to and is) just the condition of the object of

illumination. And the condition of the object of illumination is itself nothing but a state
of dependence on another Light (to illumine it). Moreover, there is no other Light at all,
thus the one Light is independent, and because of (its) independence, it is devoid of the

conditioning divisions (avaccheda) of space, time and form. Thus, it is pervasive,
eternal and the formless nature of all forms. Again, its independence is the power of
bliss; its aesthetic wonder is the power of the will; (its) condition as the Light (of
consciousness) is the power of consciousness; (its) condition as reflective awareness is

the power of knowledge, and its association with all forms, the power of action.
Although it is endowed in this way with the primary energies (of consciousness), in
actual fact the Light, undivided and endowed with the powers of will, knowledge and
action, is the form of Śiva who is at rest within His own bliss. It is He Himself who, by
virtue of (His) freedom manifests Himself in (a limited) contracted (form), is said to be

TANTRĀLOKA


Now (it is said that):


‘Logical argument (nyāya) does not operate there with respect to an
entity (artha) that has not been perceived or one whose nature has been

ascertained. Rather (it operates) with respect to one (whose nature is the object

of) doubt. Thus, doubt is one of its ancillaries.

According to such dictums, the application (praṇayana) of a treatise

(śāstra), which is essentially a (conclusive) ascertainment (nirṇaya) (of the

nature of its subject), is generally with respect to a matter (artha) which is the
object of doubt. Thus, because doubt is (one of) its ancillaries, he begins by

describing its nature.'

the individual soul (aṇu). And He then again makes Himself manifest as free, by virtue
of which He shines as the unconditioned Light (of consciousness) which is Śiva’s nature
(rūpa). There, (in that case) also, He makes Himself manifest either without or with
(some) means. Again, if (this takes place) with means, the means are either will or
knowledge or action. Thus, (the means is of) three kinds, which is that of the meditative
penetration (samāveśa) (that takes place thereby) distinguished as pertaining to Śiva
(śāmbhava), (His) power (śākta) and the individual soul (āṇava). There (in that
context), this fourfold nature (which includes the absence of means) is also taught here
successively (in due order).”

' Absolutely ignorant people have no doubts, nor do those who know all they want to
know. Doubts may arise only when there is a desire to know. The Tantrāloka is meant
for those people who have this desire, that is, those who do understand something, even
if it is just the importance of knowing more.

' The Tantrāloka is written in accord with the classic model of a Sanskrit didactic

treatise — āstra. The word is derived from the root śas, which has the sense of ‘to
instruct or ’govern’. The ‘tra’ has an agential sense. Thus, the word śāstra denotes a
text or a discipline that teaches something, and so governs a body of knowledge and its

application. The exposition of the teachings of a sāstra should be logical and coherent
so that the teachings may not be open to doubt either with regard to their content or
truth. Doubt is the essential cause of the development of thought constructs which
obscure and contract consciousness. The close association of the two — thought and

uncertainty — is reflected in the word vikalpa, which may denote both ‘a thought’ and
‘an alternative’. In this perspective, a thought construct is a conceptual assessment of

the nature of its object as one of a number of alternative possibilities. The mass of

sensations coming through the eyes, processed by the inner mental faculties, come to be
labelled and hence identified through an inner mental statement such as ‘this is a table’.

This statement is a determinative judgement, that is, ascertainment (niścaya), which is

formed on the basis of examining other alternatives which are discarded as incorrect.

This process is technically called apoha, which one could translate as ‘denial’ or

‘negation’. This kind of analysis of the cognitive process and how we reach conclusions

is accepted by various schools of Indian philosophy beginning with its initial major
formulation by the Buddhist idealist Diṅnāga in his Pramāṇasamuccaya (see Torella
2002: 128-130). This is accepted here as a method which is applicable to an

examination of the teachings which establishes their validity, even as it elucidates them.

The Buddhists formulated and carefully analysed this epistemic mechanism

because it is thereby possible to conceptually determine the nature of particular entities
without assuming that they possess a nature of their own. They need not postulate the
existence of supposed realities as their opponents do who maintain that a table is known
to be a table because its innate nature or ‘table-ness” has been grasped and correctly

represented. Even without an innate ‘own nature’ a table can be known by exclusion of


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Enunciation, Definition and Investigation '
everything else that it is not. Thus, doubts that may arise concerning what it is are
resolved. The Pratyabhijñā also accepts the existence of this cognitive process, which it
understands in the ambit of its own system. Here, as we shall see, the nature of an object
is determined by a process of progressive manifestation of its qualities as they come to
be known, until they are sufficient in number and clarity for the nature of the object that

is the bearer of those qualities to be known, or to put it another way, for it to be
manifest.
' Nyāya, which literally means ‘sound reasoning’, is an empiricist, dualist philosophy,
primariḷy concerned with logic and epistemology. It is also concerned with identifying
and elucidating the basic principles on which sound philosophical debate is based and
the proper manner to expound a philosophy in a systematic and logically coherent

manner. This is achieved by a progressive, systematic exposition of a subject in three
phases, namely, enunciation (uddeśa) of the matter to be discussed, definition (lakṣana)
of its primary characteristic and, finally, the investigation (parīkṣā) of its nature.
Vātsyāyana, an early exponent of Nyāya, writes in his commentary (bhāṣya) on the

Nyāyasūtra (1/1/3): ʻThe science of reasoning (nirṇaya) goes through three stages or
proce:s
namely, enunciation (uddeśa), definition (lakṣaṇa) and investigation
(parīkṣa). Uddeśa is the mere mention of the category by name. Lakṣaṇa consists in that
character or property that serves to differentiate that which is enunciated from

everything else. Parīkṣa is the detailed examination of what has been enunciated and

defined.’ In this case, most concretely, the ‘enunciation’ is the subject of each chapter of

the Tantrāloka. The list of these ‘enunciations’ given below serves effectively as a list
of chapter headings. Analogously, the following list of ‘definitions’ serves as an index

of the topics of the sections of each chapter. The third step, that is, ‘investigation’, is the
content of each chapter, in other words, the Tantrāloka itself.
Abhinava ensures in this way that his Tantrāloka is an authoritative treatise,
laid out respecting the rules of a systematic, logical exposition. But this is not enough.

He is also concerned to establish that the Tantrāloka also possesses the necessary
characteristics to qualify it as an authoritative transmission of the teachings which
ultimately originate from Deity. This places the authority of the Tantrāloka on the same
level as scripture. However, unlike scripture, the Tantrāloka has a human author.
Indeed, Abhinava refers to himself very clearly at the end of this chapter as the author,

as he does in several places throughout his work. The seeming contradiction is

reconciled by examining the nature of reality which, as cognitive consciousness,

involves, as usual, an analysis of perception and epistemology from this perspective. To
this end, Abhinava begins by examining the nature of doubt (lines 1/247cd to 1/253ab).
As doubt concerning metaphysical realities is removed by the teacher, he goes on to
expound the relationship between the teacher and his disciple as that between two
aspects of consciousness, namely, one that questions and the other that replies (lines

1/253cd to 1/258ab). This leads to the general application of this principle to

understanding how the perceiving subject reaches a right conclusion and achieves
certainty (niścaya) as to the nature of his object (lines 258cd to 261ab). He goes on to

examine how enunciation, definition and examination are fundamentally phases of the

act of perception, and how they are evidenced in the operation of all valid means of
knowledge (lines 261cd to 269ab). Once having established how this works, he is free to

examine this three-fold process entirely in terms of consciousness as actively engaged in

forming the objects of knowledge in the process of coming to know them, and then the

process purely in terms of the activity of consciousness as Speech and its energies (lines

269cd to 275ab). The conclusion is a brief exposition of the five types of relationship

between the teacher and the taught as aspects of the supreme one in which
consciousness is both. Thus, as the teachings of the Tantrāloka are grounded in the pure

TANTRĀLOKA

tatreha yad yad antar vā bahir vā parimr̥śyate || 247 |I

anudghāṭitarūpaṁ tat pūrvam eva prakāśate |

There (in that regard) whatever one reflects on here, whether

internal or external, manifests initially in an undisclosed (anudghātita)
(generic, unspecified) form. (247cd-248ab)
‘Internal’ means within mental consciousness (mānasavijñāna) and the

like. (Whatever one perceives is initially) in an ‘undisclosed form’, that is, its

specific qualities have not (yet) been made manifest. The meaning is that its
nature (devoid of its specific qualities consists then of just its) generic attributes

(sāmānyadharma).


This is generally what is said to be ‘doubt’. Thus, he says:


TāTTgaāTRaTēēī fēTRaiTaraT arī || 2%%¢ 11

āvra: ṣafxrzī fitṁ atṁ īaar 1

saṁśayaḥ kutracid rūpe niścite sati nānyathā |

A perception (prathā) whose form™ is (at this stage) undisclosed in

this way cannot be defined (anirvācya), and (so) is (essentially) doubt. (It
arises only) when the nature (rūpa) (of the object of this uncertainty) has
been to some degree determined (as the bearer of these generic, unspecified
attributes), not otherwise. (248cd-249ab)
‘In this way’, initially, the form of (for example, a person in the dark)
is ‘undisclosed’ʼ, that is, not revealed,' because one has not known its
specific, particular attributes such as hands and feet etc., (just its) form, which is
(its) generic qualities such as (the bare perception of its) height and the like.
reflective awareness of universal ‘’ consciousness, they flow out from the supreme
relationship, as all scriptures ultimately do.

' The primary form of doubt is a perception in which only the generic attributes of an
entity and not its particular features are perceived. For example, the perceiver knows

that ‘this is a tall standing figure’, but as only some of the object’s generic features are
apparent to him, he does not know specifically what it is. AIl perception begins this

way, but it normally moves on imperceptibly quickly to the following phases in which

the specific nature of the object is ascertained. If this does not happen, the perceiver,

stuck in this initial generic perception, experiences this initial doubt as to the nature of
what he is perceiving.

'2 The ‘form’ʼ (ākāra) of a perception is its object.

' The word I translate here as ‘undisclosed’ is ‘anunmudrita’, which literally means
‘unsealed’ʼ, ‘opened upʼ.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Thus it ‘cannot be defined’ because there is no ascertainment (niścaya) of
other kinds of specific (features) of the bearer of (these) attributes. Doubt is a
‘perception’ʼ, that is, cognition (pratīti), the nature of which is characterized by
the fact that it is not possible to say (what the object of doubt is in a certain)
determinate manner, based on both (its) aspects (generic and particular). (Doubt
is such because) it arises when one knows a generic attribute (of the entity),
such as (in the case of a figure ofa man or tree its) height or the like, but not its
particular attributes, such as (the man’s) face (if it is a man or a) cavity (if it is a

tree).™ He says this (in the sentence which in Sanskrit) begins with ‘to some

degreeʼ, that is, in some (entity) which possesses the (perceived) attributes (but)

which is defined (solely by its) generic attributes. This is the meaning. ‘Not

otherwiseʼ, that is, (no doubt exists) when the nature of the entity has been
ascertained (niścita) in its entirety or not at all (because in that case there would

be no object of doubt).


Analysing this (view), he explains:


GEāEiṂEēṭczNīz[EHE:|TIĒTHHIEPCHII

etat kim iti mukhye ‘smin etad aṁśaḥ suniścitaḥ || 249 ||
saṁśayo ‘stitvanāstyādidharmānudghāṭitātmakaḥ |
(When we ask:) ‘what is this?” (we are expressing) the primary

form (mukhya) (of doubt). (Doubt is not a total absence of knowledge, for
even when in doubt about something,) the ‘this’ aspect is well determined,

(that is, there is no doubt that something is there). Doubt (is most

essentially concerned with the ‘what’ aspect. It is that phase of perception
during which the fundamental) attributes (of an entity), including its
existence or non-existence and the like, have (as yet) not been disclosed

(udaghāṭita) (to the subject who wishes to perceive them). (249cd-250ab)


‘(When we ask:) What is this?’ there is doubt, which is essentially (a
form of) reflective awareness. In relation to other (similar forms of) reflective

awareness such as: ‘(is this) a pillar or a man?” (this is) the primary (form of

doubt,) because none of the particular qualities (of the entity) have been
disclosed. In that case, the ‘this aspect in relation to the ‘what’ aspect has been

! We see a tall erect object on a dark night which may be, for example, a man or the

stump of a tree. We can make out its generic features, perceiving, for example, ‘this is a
tall figure which seems to have a face’, but we cannot make out its particular features. In
order to be sure what it is, we need to be able to make out more specific distinguishing
features. Thus, if we see that the figure has a face, we feel certain that it is a man. Or, if

we see that it is a cavity of a tree, not a face, we know that it is a tree. Thus, for a
perception of an object to be certain and the object clearly ascertained, both aspects,
generic and particular, of that object need to be clearly perceived.

TANTRĀLOKA

correctly ascertained (niścita) by the (bare) perception of the (entity) alone

which possesses the attributes.

Surely (one may object that) the definition of doubt is that: “doubt is the
reflective awareness which is (the uncertainty) with regards to both the fixed

(ascertained) (niyata) (alternative) aspects.'" (In reply to this objection, we
say this definition is not accurate). There (in that case), one aspect has been

determined, (namely) the ‘something’ (aspect), and by that (the requirement
which defines doubt) has been met. He says this (in the second half of this

verse,) which begins with (the word) ‘doubt’.'™” The nature of (doubt) is like

that of (an entity) which has not been disclosed, that is, revealed by its particular

aṭṭributes, amongst which first of all is their ‘existence’ or ‘non-existence’.
Where the disclosure (of an entity) has not taken place because even ‘existence’
and ‘non-existence’ amongst (its fundamental) attributes have not been
ascertained, what question can there be of (its) other attributes (being
ascertained)? Thus, because the form of all of (its) attributes is undefined
(anullikhita), and so (perception) does not have the support of (any) fixed
(indubitably determined) attribute, this is the primary (form of) doubt. The point
is that the ‘what’ aspect denotes the form of the undefined entity (which is the
object of doubt). He says that:
[hī]HcāṬāq] ṜṬscza] EuEEa+: TāN IT

II Ṝ4o

Il

kim ity etasya śabdasya nādhiko ʻṛthaḥ prakāśate || 250 ||
(Indeed), the word ‘what’ does not convey more meaning (than

that). (250cd) (249ab)

(The word ‘what’ does not convey) ‘more’ than the meaning of that
word (‘whatʼ itself). Then (one may ask,) to what does it refer? With this doubt
in mind, he says:

f. --T-JaTē-R āīcaāī̄aṛ-ā 1|
'"” There are two types of doubt ~ primary and secondary. Primary doubt is simply the

uncertainty one may feel when one sees something and asks oneself ‘what is this?’ One
knows that there is something out there. This is the perception of the ‘this’ aspect of that
object of perception. However, one does not know the ‘what’ aspect because the
specifying qualities of the object, by means of which one can know what it is have not

been perceived. In the case of secondary doubt, the perception of the object is more

clearly defined. For example, one may see an elongated erect object on a dark foggy
night and ask oneself ‘is this a pillar or is this a man?’ In this type of doubt there are two

alternative possibilities. Either the object is a man or a pillar. All other possibilities are
excluded. Thus, this is not complete doubt, as is the primary form, in which the object
could be anything.

' The point of this objection is as follows. According to this definition, doubt depends
on the existence of at least two ascertained alternatives between which doubt vacillates,
and so serve as the constituent aspects of doubt. When one asks oneself ‘what is this?’ it

cannot be said to be doubt, let alone its primary form, as there are no two such
alternatives. It is just ignorance.

' Elide astitvaṁ ca nāstitvaṁ ca tat.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


kirṁ tv anunmudritākāraṁ vastv evābhidadhāty ayam |
Rather, (all) this denotes is an entity whose form has not been

disclosed. (251ab) (249cd)

“This’ is the word ‘what’.
It is (only) right that there be a primary (form of) doubt in some

circumstances when there is' a secondary (form of it). So in order to illustrate
the secondary (form of doubt) as well, he says:

# TI: || 342, |

sthāṇur vā puruṣo veti na mukhyo ‘sty eṣa saṁśayaḥ || 251 ||
bhūyaḥsthadharmajāteṣu niścayotpāda eva hi
The doubt ‘“is this a man or the trunk (of a tree)?” is not primary
(because it entails) the arising of an ascertainment (niścaya) of many of the

qualities (of the object). (251cd-252ab)

(This is) not ‘the primary form’ (of doubt) because it is not, as before
(in the previous example), one in which none of the (specifying) attributes (of
the object of doubt) are disclosed. This is because (in this case) many particulars
related to what is ‘not the trunk (of a tree)ʼ, for example, are perceived as

certain, because no other (alternative) determined fixed perception apart from
‘(this is) a trunk (ofa tree) (or a man) is possible.

Surely (one may ask,) if this is so, then it is possible that here (in this

case, the nature of the) entity may be mixed up (with another), because its fixed
(determined form) is uncertain. On the analogy of whether a fire sacrifice can be

declared (to have been completed) or not," would that not be (just a case of a
possible) alternative (vikalpa) (and not doubt)? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

3THSĪÑZRGTṬHTGTTITTT: || Ū2 1I

Read with MSs Ch, J, Ih, N sati for sāta.

'" When we see an object and we are in doubt as to whether it is a pillar or a man, the

doubt is confined to two possibilitiss because we are sure that all others that may be

possible are excluded. We perceive that there are many features of the object which
exclude the possibility that it is not a pillar and, similarly, that it is not a man.

' Theṛe are differences of opinion amongst Vedic schools as to which rites should be

performed in the course of a fire sacrifice (yajña). Consequently, disputes may arise
between followers of differing traditions as to whether it has been completed properly.

Such problems may be resolved by admitting that certain rites are optional or may be
performed in more than one way. In that case these differences would be understood as

possible options or alternatives (vikalpa).

TANTRĀLOKA

āmarśanīyadvairūāpyānudghāṭanavaśāt puṇaḥ |l 252|
saṁśayaḥ sa kimityaṁśe vikalpas tv anyathā sphuṭaḥ |
Again, doubt arises because the two (possible) natures of the objects
of reflection (between which it vacillates) have not been disclosed. It resides

in the aspect ‘what?”” Otherwise, (this uncertainty would) clearly be

(ust) an alternative (vikalpa) (between two possibilities). (252cd-253ab)

‘The two (possible) natures of the objects of reflection’, that is, (in

this case) a trunk (of a tree) and a man, have not been disclosed, in the sense
that they have not been revealed in their particular form, such as the face (of a
man), the cavity (of a tree) and the like. Thus, because this perception is

associated with the ‘what?” aspect, it is just doubt. (However,) here (in the case)

of (the alternative,) a trunk (of a tree) or a man, there is a real object of doubt,
namely, ‘is this a trunk (of a tree) or is this a man?’ But if (it were to be just)

‘what is this?’ it would be the primary (form of doubt), because in the ‘what’

aspect none of the particular attributes are disclosed, whereas here (in this case),
it is not primary, because (some) determined particulars are known. This is

the difference (between the two forms of doubt). However, in the case of an

alternative (vikalpa), such as between (whether one should offer) barley or
wheat (in a fire sacrifice), both are clearly ascertained (to be what they are), and

so their nature is not undisclosed.'" He says this (by saying): ‘otherwise, (this

uncertainty would) clearly be (just) an alternative (vikalpa) (between two

possibilities). ‘Otherwise’, this kind of doubt serves as a reason to apply the
' Alternatively, one could translate that ‘it exists when the aspect ‘what?’ is present.’

In other words, doubt in this sense only arises when one does not know the nature of
something and is enquiring into what it may be. Otherwise, if two or more things are

known, but there is a doubt as to which one to select for a particular purpose, this is not

doubt in this sense. It is simply reflection on possible alternatives, that is, thought.

'i See above, note to intro. of 1/247ab-247cd (1/247cd-248ab). Perception takes place

in two moments. The first moment is the immediate experience of the perceived entity

justas itis in its essential nature, which is grounded in the oneness of consciousness and
so is not specifically definable. In the second moment it is identified and defined as a
particular entity, the external colour ‘blue’ or the inner feeling ‘pleasure’, for example.
Each entity is defined by comparing it with similar entities and differentiating it from

others that are dissimilar. These are the ‘alternatives’. Both are known and neither is an
object of doubt, and so the formation of a thought construct or notion which labels or

defines a specific entity is not a form of doubt. Note also that entities belong to a
particular time and place. Thus, the two moments of perception are only definable as
successive from the perspective of the second ‘moment’.

' Read niyataviśeṣadharmāvagamāt for niyataviśeṣadharmānavagamāt.
'" Jayaratha explains that this verse describes the secondary form of doubt in which

some distinctive qualities of the object have been perceived. No qualities are clearly
perceived in the primary form of doubt. There is a difference between the doubt as to
whether an object is this or that and the doubt as to whether one should sacrifice with
barley or wheat. In the former case, the details are not clearly perceived, and the doubt

relates to the nature of the object. In the latter case, the possible options are known. The

decision as to which of the two should be used rests on the authority of scripture.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


scriptures because the two objects of reflection (which in this example are),

barley or wheat, have been ascertained according to the nature of their particular
attributes.' This is the sense of what is said (here).

Scripture is essentially the (authority which) decides (and settles matters
of dispute) (nirṇayātma), and a ruling (nirṇaya) generally operates in relation to
a matter of doubt (concerning scriptural ordinances). Something which is (well)

known does not become an object of doubt in this way,'" nor does one which is

(totally) unknown, because doubt is a quality (dharma) of the perceiver (not the

Although one understands that there is something which is uncertain
(just) by (the operation of) some kind of doubt, even so its perception is possible

then. The very acceptance that that (is an object of doubt) is the question
(which ultimately leads to the resolution of that uncertainty). And that too (in its

turn), like its cause, goes on to serve as a reason to apply the scriptures (when
applicable). In order to reach a decision concerning that (matter), the application
of the scripture that is being applied (as the authority to settle the doubt)
proceeds in three ways, namely, ‘enunciation’ (uddesśa), ‘definition’ (lakṣaṇa)
and ‘examination’ (parīkṣā). ʻEnunciation’ is just a declaration of the subject
matter (padārtha) by (its) name. The first thing that must be done is to take this

up, because it is not possible to define or examine (a subject) that has not been

enunciated. Thus, without (the initial) enunciation (of a subject) it is not

possible to apply scripture, the nature of which is to define and examine (a
subject that has been enunciated as an object of enquiry). Thus, there (in that
context, the application of scripture) is also an auxiliary (of the resolution of a
doubt).
Surely (one may ask,) if the application of scripture is accomplished by
just (that) one (initial phase), what purpose is served by (having) the three? If
(one were to ask this, our reply would be that) that is not so, because they are
said here to serve as a reason (for the application of scripture) insofar as they are
mutually connected to one another. (The right understanding of) a matter (artha)
which is said by someone to be (an object of) doubt is determined by scripture
through (the process of) enunciation and the rest. Thus, he says (the following)
in order to establish that, although there is a difference in the nature (of these
three), in this way (collectively), in (their generic) common (samāna) form as

the perception (prathā) (of something) the nature of which has not been

revealed (anudghāṭita), (it serves as) a cause for the application (pravṛtti) of

scripture.

TĪTJGTTTRTTTTĀTaTYTHT ĠṬ II 43 11
2 See previous note.

'" RṞead upalabdhārtha evaṁ saṁśayaviṣayatāṁ for upalabdha eva saṁśayaviṣayatā.
'"” If doubt were to be the result of simply not knowing an object, then all the countless

unknown objects would be the objects of doubt. But no doubt arises concerning
something that is totally unknown. Moreover, knowing or not knowing relates to the
perceiver. It is the perceiver who is in doubt, and it is his concern to come to know what

he is uncertain about. Uncertainty is not a quality of the object.

Read tadāpi for tadā.

TANTRĀLOKA

ṢGIR. JY: iJT TJ

tenānudghāṭitātmatvabhāvaprathanam eva yat || 253 ||
prathamaṁ ṣa ihoddeśaḥ praśnaḥ saṁśaya eva ca |
Thus, the initial (moment of) perception (in the cognitive process) of
the (mere) existence of something (the specific nature of which) has not

(yet) been disclosed is here (termed) ‘enunciation’ (uddeśa), ‘question’
(praśna) and ‘doubt’ (saṁśaya). (253cd-254ab)

‘Thus’, by applying the principle (nyāya) taught previously, ‘the initial

(moment of) perception (prathana) (in the cognitive process) of somethingʼ,

which is that of its bare existence (vastumātra), ‘(the specific nature of which)

has not (yet) been disclosed, is here (termed) ‘enunciation’ (uddeśa),

‘question’ (praśna) and ‘doubt’ (saṁśaya)’. The nature of doubt there is such
as has just been explained. In the (course of) enunciation, the perception of the
nature of an entity is (that of one that) is undisclosed, because the things
(padārtha) (that are the object of enquiry are) denoted by just their bare name
alone (nāmadheyamātra). The same can be said (vācya) also (with regard to the
formulation of a) ‘question’ (namely, that it is an indeterminate perception of
something), otherwise (if it were not), it would be the determination (of its
nature) (nirṇaya) and so there would be no difference between it and the answer

(to the question concerning its nature).

There (in that case) a question arises with regards to something which is
the object of doubt. Thus (it is only) after that has been ascertained that the
question can be formulated (nirṇetavya). (But how is it possible to account for
this circularity?). In order to explain that and its true nature, now that the
occasion has arisen (to do s0), he says:

hIERIĒSEAIYICEETGTEEIĪĪÚĀETAAHI
tathānudghāṭitākārabhāvaprasaravartmanā || 254 |
prasarantī svasaṁvittiḥ praṣṭrī śiṣyātmatāṁ gatā |
One’s own consciousness, extending by means of the path, which is

the unfolding of the state of being (bhāvaprasara) (that presents itself
initially) in an undisclosed form, assumes the nature of a disciple (and is
called the) ‘enquiring’ (consciousness). (254cd-255ab)
' Jayaratha explains here how all three, that is, the initial enunciation ofa topic to be

discussed, the formulation of a question and doubt, are indeterminate perceptions, the
content of which is just the bare existence of what is being enunciated, the object of
enquiry or doubt. As such they arise in the first phase of perception to mature in the
second phase into determinate perceptions, which are clear conceptual representations

of the content of the first phase through which its specific nature is known and hence
made manifest.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

Here (according to this) nondualist doctrine (advayanaya), (the view is

that) ‘consciousness alone, being as it is ultimate reality, is everything’. Thus, it
is unreasonable (to maintain) that there is (any) difference (bheda) between the

disciple and the teacher etc., who is the one who questions and the one who
answers (respectively). ‘In this way’, in the aforementioned manner, the

‘undisclosed form’ is one with consciousness because it is full to overflowing

with all existing things. ‘The state of being’ (of consciousness that presents

itself initially in this form is the supreme level of Speech which) is (the one)
ultimate reality (pāramārthikaṁ vastu), the nature of which is full (complete
and all-embracing) (pūrṇa). Its ‘unfolding’ (prasara) is (its) descent, (which

takes place) by (progressive) entry into the (lower) levels (of Speech), beginning

with the Speech of Vision (Pasyantī). That is itself the ‘path’. One’s own

consciousness itself, contracted, ‘extending’, that is, assuming the states of the
Corporeal and the other (levels of Speech) by means of this (path), manifesting
(thereby) the plane of the disciple who is the perceiver, is said to be the
‘enquiring (consciousness). This is the meaning.

Where and how is its state as the enquiring (consciousness)? He says:


TāTāTTTYĪRAṬTTSTtTTRTT: II/ 3uU 1
EUEEHPEEIHCCĒIIĪĪ
qṬaaīai YTGTTaTST JÑŪRaTHĪ ||QUĒ II

tathāntaraparāmarśaniścayātmatirohiteḥ || 255 ||

prasarānantarodbhūtasaṁhārodayabhāg api |
yāvaty eva bhaved bāhyaprasare prasphuṭātmani || 256 ||
anunmīlitarūpā sā praṣṭrī tāvati bhaṇyate |
In this way, when the certainty (niścaya) which is the inner
reflective awareness (consciousness has of its own nature as the knower) is
obscured, (the cognitive process assumes two forms) that emerge from the
flow (of extroverted awareness) that follows after (this obscuration has

taken place). (One is) withdrawal (into the higher levels of awareness where
there is certainty, and the other form) is emergence (down into the lower
levels where there is not). The form (of consciousness) that has not opened
up (and become active) when the external, clearly evident expansion (of

perception that moves out towards its object) takes place is said to be the
enquiring (aspect of consciousness). (255cd-257ab) (254-255)

‘In this way’, because (consciousness) is the (one) supremely nondual

(reality, it encompasses this entire process). “When the certainty’, that is,

stability (dārḍhya), of ‘the inner reflective awareness’ which is oneness with

' See çommentary to the following verses in terms of the levels of Speech below ad

272cd-273ab (271).

TANTRĀLOKA

the perceiver, ‘is obscured’ because its successively higher (more evident)
nature is not present in the one that progressively (obscured) follows,
(consciousness assumes) two (forms) that arise subsequently ‘from the flow’

(of awareness) that is directed (away from the perceiver) to the outer (sphere of
objectivity). (One is) ‘withdrawal’, which is the (progressively developing)
state of rest within one’s own nature of the form (of awareness which) is the
Supreme, and the other (levels of Speech that merge into it). And (the other is)

‘emergence’, which is the external outpouring (of consciousness) in the form of
(awareness that progressively descends) from the Speech of Vision onwards

(down to Corporeal Speech).
That is the form of consciousness ‘when the clearly evident’

manifestation of the pair, subject and object etc., which is the ‘external

expansion (of perception that moves out towards its object) takes place’;
‘(the aspect of consciousness) that has not opened up (and become active)”
does not manifest as consciousness. It is said to be ‘the enquiring (aspect of

consciousness) insofar as it is perceived to be undisclosed' in this way. This
is the meaning.
Consciousness is not only the enquiring subjectiv
question and the rest. Thus, he says:

it is also the

[GEECREEICÉEI FEIItECCTĀHṬIINCH

TṀTRTTSAT

svayam eyaṁ vibodhaś ca tathā praśnottarātmakaḥ || 257 ||
guruśiṣyapade ‘py eṣa dehabhedo hy atāttvikaḥ |

When one is in doubt, the mind oscillates between being sure and then again being
uncertain. When the state of certainty prevails, awareness, previously directed outwards
to the object, flows back into the perceiver from the object and so, as he no longer needs
to know the outer object, he abides tranquil within his own essential nature. The absence
of certainty about the nature of the object diverts the flow of awareness back to it and,

attempting to regain that fundamental certainty of inner rest, emerges out of its pure
subjectivity. As it does so, awareness articulates its formulations and hypotheses,
ranging from intuitions at the level of the Speech of Vision through to that of the
cogitation and notions of Middle Speech and out into Corporeal Speech. Then reaching
the furthest extreme of doubt and its expression, finding some certainty again, the flow
reverses back again into the subject. In this way, it oscillates back and forth as we feel,
‘O Ñam not sureʼ, and then ‘Ah, yes, now I understand’, and then, as that certainty is not
full and stable, it again redevelops as before and so on. Ultimately, perfect certainty is a

state of rest in which consciousness shines unobscured by doubt. Such is the original
liberated state attained by the recognition in an instant of its own pristine, unobscured

nature. This is how the Empowered Means (Śāktopāya) leads to No Means. We shall see

in Chapter Four that the purpose of contemplating the Twelve Kaālīs as phases of the
perennial rhythm of consciousness is to remove the doubt that obstructs its recognition.
' The ‘undisclosed’ consciousness does not manifest as consciousness; instead it
manifests as the object of doubt. Perceiving that, the residual consciousness which arises
and falls away in the manner described, sometimes understanding then again not, is the

enquiring perceiving subjectivity.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


(Awakening) consciousness (vibodha) on the plane of the teacher
and the taught is itself in this way (both) question and answer. Indeed, this

difference between the bodies (of the teacher and disciple) is not ultimately
real. (257cd-258ab)
Abhinava expounds this teaching more extensively in the Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa.


There he says:


“The matter (vastu) (taught in the course of the questions and answers) is the
supreme reality (paramārtha) of the Supreme Lord, whose nature is consciousness, and
so pulses radiantly inwardly without division in this way (at the supreme level of
Speech). It is contemplated (parāmrṛṣta) on the plane of the Speech of Vision (pasśyanīī)
as the intention (free of conceptualization) to differentiate letter, word and sentence. It is
present in a differentīated manner (bhedena) on the plane of the Middle (level of
Speech) until (yāvaṁ) within (the level of) Corporeal (Speech — vaikharī) it finally
assumes (the form of) separately divided compositions of phenomenal (māyīya) letter,
word and sentence based on the matter (taught in the form of question and answer)
(vastupūrvaka).” (PTv p. 13)
‘Initially (at the level of Supreme Speech), the matter (vastu) (taught in the
scripture) in the form of questions and their answers is undivided (into these polarities)

and is perpetually actively (existent) (satatodita). Thus, the point here is essentially this:

one’s own Self which is all things shines (spontaneously and independently) by itself. It
contemplates itself inducing a state of wonder (within itself) (as it does so) by means of

question and answer, which is undivided from itself as the subjectivity (ahantā) which is
its own nature consisting of (both) the one who questions and the one who replies.

(Thus, the reflecting awareness that) “I myself, who desire (to experience) such

extraordinary wonder (vicitracamatkāra), knowing it in this way, am just that” . . .
(unfolds from the beginning through to the middle and end of the Parātrīśika,) or else

(one could say, throughout) all the scriptures derived from the five currents, such that
this worldly business (of their existence is accomplished). This is said to be the supreme
relationship (saṁbandha) (between teacher and disciple). I, Abhinavagupta, have
explained the essence of (the doctrine concerning) question (and answer)
(praśnasarvaṣva) which always invokes (āvaha) Bhairava’s plane of being immediately,

and is the eṣsence of the teaching which is to be kept secret. (ibid. p. 14-15)

‘Abhinava has offered this explanation of (the doctrine with regard to the)
question (and answer) (praśnavyākhyā) concerning the reality of the Trika (teachings)
(trikatattva) in order to tear asunder with great force (haṭhāt) the knot (of Māyā that

blocks access to) the Sky of the Heart for those whose mind thirsts to drink the juice of

(the aesthetic savour of) Śiva and, penetrated by Śiva, is constantly engaged (read

saktam for sattāṁ) in destroying (all that is) inauspicious (asiva). (ibid. p. 63)
‘Consciousness, the Goddess (bhagavatī) Parā, is by Her very nature spreading
forth (as questioning awareness). Undivided from Bhairava, She is said to be the
supreme power of the will. The body she bears is the Speech of Vision and the rest (of

the levels of Speech), which are forms of Parāparā and Aparā, (its) nature the extending

powers of knowledge (and action). That is the act of reflective awareness
(parāmarśana) which in this way is in the form of (that) spreading forth (of the powers
of consciousness). It is said to be the question, and the Goddess is the one who asks the
question which is of that nature. The act of reflective awareness (parāmarśana) of its

extending form is said to be the supreme one, and its nature is that question and answer.

Again, that (as the individual answer) of the other (apara) (aspect of)

consciousness (that responds) is at the beginning and end. It is the instrument of
withdrawal into the bliss of supreme dense (uninterrupted) consciousness (that occurs)
repeatedly. Bhairava’s body is the entire flow that has been contemplated inwardly. It
unfolds constantly as the essential nature of the one who replies. These two, the flow

TANTRĀLOKA


That is said (in the Svacchandatantra):


‘The deity Sadāśiva, having established Himself on the plane of the

teacher and disciple, brought the Tantra (down into the world), in accord with
the particular supporting level (of descent), by means of statements made of

words that precede (as questions) and follow on (as answers).

and the withdrawal, are not measured by time, and so that reality has just one nature

which is (both) question and answer. That is the supreme relationship (between teacher

and disciple), which is endowed with the state of Anuttara the teachers described in this
way in the past as the wealth of the essence of Trika.’ (ibid. p. 64-65). Concerning the
types of relationships between the teacher and the taught, see below 1/274ab-277cd
(1/274cd-278ab).
According to Sanderson (2005b: 94), this means that: ‘the lineage is to be

understood as a single state of being within which individual identities are incidental
and irrelevant. This is the basis of the doctrine that the guru lineage and the deity are

one and the same, and the justification of the injunction that the initiate must look upon
the guru as deity incarnate.’ Perhaps Sanderson is forgetting that according to the view

of nonduality taught here although individual identity is grounded in universal one, the

latter does not cancel out the former. Indeed, it reinforces it at the deepest and most
universal level as its true essential nature. Cf. above, 1/232cd-234 (233-235ab) and MM

p. 95-96.

SVT 8/31cd-82ab which also quoted in SvTu ad 1/1-4ab. The printed text of the SyT

reads tantram ādhārabhedataḥ for tantraṁ samavatārayat — ‘tantra was brought down

(to earth) — in both instances. As this is the reading of all the manuscripts also, I take

this to be the correct one. This verse is also quoted in in the commentary by

Sivopādhyāya on VBh 7ab and in PTv p. 12. Jayaratha’s reading of this verse agrees

with the reading there. Following the verse Jayaratha quotes here, the Śvacchandatantra
goes on to describe how the Tantra ‘descended’ in stages from level to level,˚as higher

beings progressively taught lower beings at each stage of descent. So the questions and

answers are, as the Tantra says, ‘in accord with the distinct planesʼ (ādhārabhedataḥ) on

which they reside. So, for example, it was given by Śiva’s will to Īśvara, who then told
it to Vidyā, who transmitted it to the Lords of Vidyās and so on.
tajjñānam īśvare ʻdāt tad īśvareṇa śivecchayā ||

vidyāyāḥ kathitaṁ pūrvaṁ vidyeśebhyas tathādarāt | (ṢVṬT 8/32cd-33ab)

‘He gave its knowledge to Īśvara and by Śiva’s will, Īśvara taught it first to
Vidyā and then, in the same way, (it was transmitted) to the Vidyeśas with reverence.
(8/32cd-33ab)

devaḥ paravākśaktimayaḥ śivabhaṭṭāraka eva | sadāśiva iti gṛhītatattadbhāūmikaḥ |
svayaṁ .guruśiṣyapade sthitveti pratibhābhuvi praṣṭṛprativaktṛbhāvāsūtraṇena
paramamahā̃
ntīvākśaktyāsūtritapūrvottarapadātmakair vākyair upalakṣitaṁ
tantram aśeṣaśāstra-sandarbhamayaṁ taj jñānaṁ ceśvare ‘dād iti saṁkramitavān |
ādhārabhedata iti īśvarāmmakam ādhārabhedam āśritya svayaṁ tadātmanā sthitvā ity
arthaḥ | tajjñānam īśvare dattam iti tu pāṭhaḥ pūrvaślokānta āsūtryeti yojayitvā tena

cety anuṣaṅgeṇa vyākhyeyaḥ | iyatā mahaisambandho darśitaḥ ’| śivecchayā

sadāśivecchayā, ity anenānāyātaśaktipāto nopadeśya iti dhvanati |

‘The deity’ is Lord Śiva Himself who is made of the power of Supreme
Speech. (He is) Sadāśiva, in the sense that he has assumed that role, ‘having eṣtablished

Himself on the plane of the teacher and disciple’. ‘The tantra’ is the entire collection of


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


scripture. ‘He gave its knowledge to Īśvara’, that is, it was transmitted (to him) by the

statements that characterize (the scriptures) ‘made of words that precede (as questions)
and follow on (as answers). It is outlined (initially) by the power of Speech, which is

the supreme Great Speech of Vision that marks (in a potential form) on the plane of
creative insight (pratibhā), the relationship between the one who questions and one who
replies. (This happens) ‘in accord with the particular supporting levels (of descent)’. The
particular supporting level is Īśvara. (He did s0) ‘having established himself (there).’

The meaning is that he established himself as being of that nature.

The reading ‘its knowledge was given to Īśvara’ indicates that having linked
what was said at the end of the previous verse to that, (this line) should be explained by
associating them together. The great relationship (between the teacher and the taught) is

presented by (stating) this. (This takes place) by Śiva’s will, that is, by Sadāśiva’s will.

By (saying) this it is implicitly suggested that one for whom a descent of the power (of
grace) has not come about, is not to be taught.

vidyāyā iti ---- aṣṭavargavibhinnā ca vidyā sā (mātṛkaiva tu) | (1O/11A4) iti

devyās

tathā

vedanapradhānatvād

vidyāśabda-

vācyasyāśeṣasya
mantragrāmasya,
anantabhaṇārakādibhyaś
ca
vidyeśebhyo
mantracakravartibhya īśvareṇa tantraṁ tajjñānaṁ ca kathitaṁ saṁkramaṇayuktyā
vimarśapadaṁ nītam | ādarād iti bhaktyullāsaprakarṣāt |
yady pi bhagavato mātṛkā tadutthāś ca mantrāḥ parameśavad bhedenāvabhāsitā
vidyātattva-dhāmni tāvad aśeṣaviśvābhedavyāptir atra nimagneva sthiteti tām
unmajjayitum īśvareṇa viśvānujighṛkṣayā jñānasaṁkrāntir atra kṛtā upapannaiva |

‘Vidyā’ (is defined as follows): “That Vidyā (is Mātṛkā,) who is divided into
the eight classes of letters.” (10/1144) The goddess, as will be explained, is called
Maātrikā, and because (she is) predominantly sentient awareness (vedana), is denoted by
the word ‘Vidyā’ (‘ Knowledge’). She is the entire multitude of Mantras. Īśvara imparted

the Tantra and its knowledge to the Lords of the Vidyās who, beginning with the Lord

Ananta, are the emperors of Mantras. (Thus) by the process of transmission it was

brought onto the plane of reflective awareness. (This was done) with reverence, that is,

by virtue of the excellence of the outpouring of (their) devotion.
Although the Mātṛkā of the Lord and the Mantras that arise from Her are made
manifest, like the Supreme Lord, as separate (from each other and their source), (even
s0) within the abode of the Vidyā principle the entire universe is thus (tāvar) pervaded
by oneness and abides as if immersed here. It is right that, in order to make that
(Mātṛkā) emerge (out from there), Īśvara, desiring to grace the universe, has transferred
(that) knowledge here.

itaḥ prabhṛty antarālasambandhaḥ āsūtritaḥ
mayāpi tava deveśi sādhikāraṁ samarpitam (8/36cd)

ity etāvat paryanto bhaviṣyati ||

evar
paśyantīprasaraṇaparyantāṁ
madhyamāprasaraṇenāha --

śāstrasthitim

uktvā,

māyāniyatiparyantais tasmād rudrair avāpi tat | 8-33 |
From here onwards (the Tantra) will refer to the Intermediate Relationship in
this way, ending with (the following line): “O mistress of the gods, I also offered this to
you along with authority (over it).” (8/36cd)

Having taught the condition of the scriptures up to the flowing forth of the
Speech of Vision, he (now) says (how this takes place) as the flowing forth of the
Middle (Speech).

TANTRĀLOKA

‘From him, it was acquired by the Rudras present up to (the principle) of
Māyā’s Niyati. (8/33cd)
tasmād iti vidyātattvacakravartino ‘nantabhaṭārakād ity arthāt | māyāniyatiparyantair
iti maṇḍaliprabhr̥tibhiḥ kañcukavāsibhiśca rudrair avāpīti saṅkramaṇayuktyaiva || 33 ||
tato ʻnantaraṁ tad eva jñānaṁ tathaiva ----

śrīkaṇṭheneśvarāt prāptaṁ jñānaṁ paramadurlabham | (8/4ab)

From the sense (we understand that) ‘from him’ (means) from the Lord

Ananta, who is the emperor of the Vidyā principle. It was acquired by the Rudras

‘present up to (the principle) of Māyā’s Niyati’, beginning from Maṇḍalin and those

who reside in the Kañcukas by the process of transmission. Then, after that, that same
knowledge was (passed on) in the same way. (Thus he says that)
_ 'the knowledge that is extremely hard to acquire was obtained by Śrīkaṇṭha
from Īśvara. (8/34ab)

ahaṁ hi bhagavãn īśvarãtmanaḥ śivasya śiṣyaḥ maṇḍalyādyās tv anantaśiś

madhye puṅstattvādhiṣṭhātāro
rudrā
bandhahetutayā
etājjñānaśaktiṣaṁkrāṇtir na kṛtā || tato ‘pi tathaivaā ----

sthāpitā

iti

I myself, the Lord (bhagavat), am the disciple of Śiva who is Īśvara. (He has)
endless numbers of disciples, beginning with Maṇḍalin. Here in the middle are the
Rudras, who preside over the principle of the individual soul, placed (there) as the cause

of bondage. Thus, the power of that knowledge was not transmitted to them. After that
also, in the same way:
tenāpi tadadhaḥ proktaṁ rudrāṇām īśyarecchayā |I
pradhānāc chatarudrāntaṁ dīkṣayitvā vidhānataḥ |
mamāpi ca purā dīkṣā tathā caivābhiṣecanam ||
śrīkaṇṭhena purā dattaṁ tantraṁ sarvārthasādhakam | (8/34cd-36ab)

By Īśvara’s will, he too taught what was below that to the Rudras. He first

initiated (those who reside) in Fundamental (pradhāna) (Nature) (and from there) up to
the one hundred Rudras, in the (proper) prescribed manner. My initiation also (was
given) before, and so too (my) consecration was given to me in the past by Śrīkaṇṭha,

and (so also) the Tantra which is the means to attain every goal. (8/34cd-36ab)

vady api guṇatattve śrīkaṇṭhanāthaḥ sthitaḥ, tathāpy asau śivaśiṣyatvena
prabhāvātiśayavān
iti
svordhvasthaprakṛtivartinaḥ
krodhādyas
svādhāratattvagatānāṁ ca śatarudrāntānāṁ rudrāṇām anugrahītā |
kailāsavāsinas tantrapravaktur_ bhagavata umāpater uktiḥ | tad ittham anantādyāḥ

maṇḍalinas tv anantaśiṣyāḥ,
krodhādayaḥ śatarudrāntā umāpatiś ca śrīkaṇṭha:
ity adiṣṭaṁ bhagavatā | tena yat
kheṭakanandanena ---Although the Lord Śrīkaṇṭha resides in the principle of the guṇas, even so, as
Śiva’s disciple he possesses an extraordinary power (prabhāva), and so he graces all the

Rudras, who are above Prakṛti, that is, the eight beginning with Krodha, and the hundred

Rudras who are located in the principle which is his foundation. ‘My teaching, that is,
that of the speaker of the Tantras, who resides on (Mount) Kailāsa, the Lord (bhagavat)

Umāpati. He is in this way Ananta and the rest, Śrīkaṇṭha and the disciples of Śiva, who


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Similarly (it is said elsewhere):


‘The goddess is herself established as the one who questions and the

one who replies.” '

Surely (one may ask,) the mutual difference between teacher and
disciple is perceived directly, so what (is this you are saying that is) their nature

is the Lord God (īśvarabhaṭṭāraka), (as well as) those who are part of the assembly
(maṇḍala) and are Ananta’s disciples, namely Krodha and the rest, those ending with
the hundred Rudras, Umāpati, and Śrīkaṇṭha’s disciples. This is what the Lord has
taught. Thuṣ, (this is what) Kheṭakananda has said:

ete kalādiyogāt prakaṭīkṛtadṛkkriyāḥ pareśena |I" (tasaṁ. 30)
ity uktam
‘The members of the assembly (mnaṇḍalin), Śrīkaṇṭha and (the eight Bhairavas)
Kroḍha etc., the hundred Bhavas along with the Lords of the Heroes. The Supreme Lord
has made (their powers of) perception and action clearly evident by (their) union with
limited agency (kalā) and the rest of (the Kañcukas).
tad yathoktānusāraṁ kvacit sākṣāt kvacit pāramparyeṇeti vyākhyeyam, na tv aviśeṣeṇa |
dīkṣayitveti, abhiṣecanaṁ kṛtveti ca śāktasamāveśasaṁkṛramaṇayuktyā pūrvaṁ

śabhavasamāveśayuktyaiva

| / evaṁ

ca

nādīkṣitasya jñānagrahaṇe,

nāpy

anabhiṣiktasya taddãne ʻdhikāra ity ādiṣṭaṁ bhavati | athaitat tantraṁ ca tajjñānaṁ ca
saṁkramaṇayuktyaiva ---- mayāpi tava deveśi sādhikāraṁ samarpitam || (8/36cd) itaḥ

prabhr̥i vaikharyāḥ prasaraḥ l 36

In accord with what has been said, that (transmission) should be explained (to
take place) directly in some cases or indirectly in others, not without distinction, once
initiated and having (been) consecrated, by means of the transmission (brought about)
by the empowered penetration (śāktasamāveśa) first (and then) by means of Śambhu'’s
penetration (sāṁbhavasamāveśa). In this way it is taught that one who is not initiated

has no authority to receive knowledge, nor is one who is not consecrated (authorized) to

give it. Now that Tantra and its knowledge is (its) by means of (its) transmisṣṣion:
‘O mistress of the gods, I also offered this to you along with authority (over
it). (8/36cd)

From here onwards it is the flow of Corporeal Speech (through which the

Tantra is transmitted from human teachers to human disciples).”

This is the way the ‘descent of a Tantra’ (tantrāvatāra) is generally described.
Itis standard practice for a major Tantra to do this. Thus Abhinava, following the same
model, presents the account of the transmission of the Siddhayogīśvarīmata, the root

Tantra of the Trika, in Chapter Thirty-Six below. He then goes on to present the
transmission of the currents of the Śaiva teachings through the lineages of teachers, to
conclude that the Tantrāloka is the essence of all of these transmissions, which are
ultimately rooted in that of the SYM. Thus, just as a major Tantra attests to its own
authority by tracing its origin from Deity, Abhinava implicitly claims the same authority

for the same reason and in the same way for the teachings of the Tantrāloka.

'” Ifin place of the reading svayarṁ devī, we adopt the reading in MSs K, Ch, J, h, and

T: dvayaṁ devī, the meaning would be ‘the goddess is established as the two, namely,

one who questions and the one who replies.”

TANTRĀLOKA

as consciousness? (In response to this question,) he says: ‘this (difference
between the bodies) etc. ‘is not ultimately realʼ, that is, it has no reality
(avāṣṭava). The point is that consciousness itself, by the glorious power of its
freedom, makes each (particular) embodied state and the like manifest.

He says that:


fkrā: | 2u¢ 11
aTNTTATA gTHHTTT-ĪHTITḤ’ |

bodho hi bodharūpatvād antarnānākṛtīḥ sthitāḥ || 258 II
bahirābhāsayaty eva drāk sāmānyaviśeṣataḥ |

Consciousness (bodha) itself, (precisely) because it is consciousness,
causes the many forms present within (it) to manifest externally in an

instant as (both) universal and particular. (258cd-259ab)

The Supreme Lord, Whose nature is consciousness, ‘causes the many
forms’, that is, each particular kind of phenomenon (bhāvajāta), ‘present

within (it) to manifest’ as (both) universal and particular, ‘externally’ as
(individual forms) separate (from one another) (vicchedena) ‘in an instantʼ,

without delay, because it does not depend on anything else (to do s0). This is

the meaning of (this) statement.
There (in that case), what is the external manifestation of the universal?


Thus (with this question in mind,) he says:


RPTTTITṬJTITRITRTATĀTTT
ATĒT |I 24X 11
rīīṝz7 gftz: aīāṛzārgftz:

srakṣyamāṇaviśeṣāṁśākāṁkṣāyogyasya kasyacit l| 259 ||

The emission (of a universal is that) of a certain attribute (of an

object, such as the ‘cow-ness’ of a cow,) which is fit to receive, and requires,
the aspects (of its fully determined form,) which are the particulars to be
emitted (in order for it to be known). (Thus,) the emission of the universal
(with no particulars) is essentially (the content of) doubt. (259cd-260ab)


The ‘universal’ (sāmānya) is the generic object of doubt and enquiry. It is the

question, and the consciousness, fundamentally free of thought constructs, that
questions. The ‘particular (viśeṣa) comprises all the details and specific features of the
object discerned by their corresponding thought constructs.

' Cf. Utpaladeva (IP 1/5/7) who says: ‘Indeed the conscious nature, the Lord, like a
yogi, independently of material causes, by virtue of His will alone, makes the multitude

of entities present within Himself, externally manifest.’


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘The aspects (of its fully determined form) which are the particulars
to be emitted’ are those that will pour forth (from consciousness) as pertaining
to the specifying characteristics (of that entity) (svālakṣaṇya). There (in this
regard, it is said): “a universal devoid of particulars (is as non-existent) as are a
hare’s horns.” Thus, in accord with this reasoning (yukti), because (a universal)
is invariably associated (with particulars, it) ‘requires’ (them), that is, (is

naturally in) a state of propensity (towards associating with them). There (in that
case), ‘a certain attribute’ which is of a fixed (determined nature) (niyata),

such as ‘cow-nessʼ, that is ‘fit’ (to receive the particulars) even when it is not
propense to do so, because it is present (equally) in all (the entity), and its
essential nature does not cease, and so possesses the corresponding
(appropriate) qualities (anuguṇa) (to receive them). The external manifestation
(of this attribute) is ‘the emission of the universal (with no particulars)’, and

that, because it is a form of perception (prathā) in which its nature is
undisclosed, is ‘doubt’. Thus, the meaning is that the perception of doubt
(saṁśayapratīti) is the perception of the universal (undefined nature of an
object), which requires the appropriate particulars (of its fully determined form

to manifest and be known clearly as that particular object).

Analogously (evaṁ), the nature of the emission of the particular
(qualities of an entity) is the perception of the ascertainment (of its nature)
(niścaya). Thus, he says:

srakṣyamāṇo viśeṣāṁśo yadā tūparamet tadā || 260 ||
nirṇayo mātṛrucito nānyathā kalpakoṭibhiḥ |
(its)

(Only) when (the emission of) the aspect (of the object) consisting of

particular (qualities) which is to be emitted ceases does an

ascertainment (nirṇaya) (of the nature of an object) take place in accord

2 Ṭhe person who enquires is in doubt. He only has a vague, general notion of what he

wants to know. In order to understand, he needs to know specific details. Thus, he asks

questions. The answers supply the details until finally the object of doubt becomes

clearly known. The nature of the object is essentially the same consciousness which is
the nature of the perceiver. Thus, as both question and answer reside together as aspects

of the same consciousness, the one who questions already knows the answer somewhere

in the depths of his consciousness. Accordingly, this process of progressively
developing questions and answers is understood to be a progressive disclosure of the
object which is ‘covered over” within consciousness. This process comes to an end only
when the one who enquires is satisfied that he has known what he wants to know, and
that happens when the knowledge he already possesses innately in his consciousness is
sufficiently revealed. In other words, the teacher does not really teach anything that the
disciple does not already know. He simply helps his disciple to recognise the truth

within himself. This takes place, as Abhinava puts it further ahead, ‘by an intense

appropriation of the vitality (vīrya) (that is, reflective awareness) of his own nature’.

TANTRĀLOKA

with (the satisfaction of) the desire (to know it on the part) of the

perceiver, not otherwise, even in ten million aeons. (260cd-261ab)

‘When’ however, ‘(the emission of) the aspect (of the object)
consisting of (its) particular (qualities) which are to be emitted ceasesʼ, that
is, when the emission that has as its field of operation particulars (viśeṣasṛsti) is
brought to an end because all the particulars that serve to (reach a correct)

ascertainment (of its nature)' have been emitted, then that itself should be (the
correct and) certain determinate perception (niścaya), that is, conviction
(pratyaya) (that, for example,) “this is indeed the trunk (of a tree)”, because it is
the perception (of that object) whose nature is (thus) disclosed (udghāṭita). The

arising of this (ascertainment) is related to the desire of the perceiver (to know

it), and so it is said that (it takes place) ‘in accord with (the satisfaction of) the
desire (to know it on the part) of the perceiver’. The point is that (the nature
of an entity is) ascertained (niścita) to the degree that the perceiver is satisfied

that “(now) I have known (it)”. ‘Otherwise’, on the contrary, it could never be

(s0), because the perceiver’s desire does not (find) rest. He says that (with the
words): ‘ʻnot otherwise, even in ten million aeons.”
This is not only just the ascertainment (niścaya) of that (object’s
nature); it is also (its) ‘definition’ etc. Thus, he says:

|| 2ē2 1|

tasyātha vastunaḥ svātmavīryākramaṇapāṭavāt || 261 ||
unmudraṇaṁ tayākṛtyā lakṣaṇottaranirṇayāḥ |
Now, the disclosure (unmudraṇa) of that entity (with all its
particulars) according to (its own specific) form that takes place by an

intense (pātava) appropriation of the vitality (vīrya) of one’s own nature,
(is termed the) ‘definition’ (lakṣaṇa), ‘reply’ (uttara) and ‘ascertainment’
(nirṇaya) (of its nature). (261cd-262ab)

‘The disclosure’ in that very form (as it truly is) is the discovery of the
specific, well determined (pratiniyata) nature ‘of that’ particular (specific)
‘entity°. (It takes place by) the ‘appropriation’, that is, making the vitality of
one’s own nature, (which is the intensity of a state of awareness,) averted from

(everything) other than that,' the object (of awareness), as being one’s own.
'"Cf. below 1/270ab (1/270cd).

' Read niścayopayogināṁ for niścayopayoginā.

' Read with MSs Ch, Jh and I pramātricchāyā evāviśrānteḥ for pramātricchāyām-

Cf. the use of this expression above in 1/200b.

' The subject applies the vitality of the cognitive energy of the power of his reflective

awareness, which would otherwise be directed elsewhere, to his object, that thereby

becomes defined in his field of awareness.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


(It is) ‘intense’ there (in that case) because it is free of all (other) needs (and
expectations and so is focused on that alone). That (revelation of the nature of
the object in this way is its) ‘definition’, and is (also) said to be the ‘reply (to

the enquiry as to its nature, as well as its) ‘ascertainment’, because there is no
difference (between them) with regards to the perception (prathā) (of the entity)
whose nature has been disclosed. There (in that context), the definition is the
attribute (of the entity) which informs (the perceiver) of its true (specific)

nature, which (is unique to it and) not common (with anything else). The ‘reply’

is the removal of defects (in one’s understanding), which assists the knowledge

of (the entity’s) true nature, and ‘ascertainment’ is the understanding of its true
nature (tattvāvabodha).

Surely (one may ask,) as the essence of the understanding of the true
nature (of an entity) is not different (in these cases), then why is ‘examination’
not included along with ‘definition’, as is ascertainment? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

q: || ēx 11
SJJĪ AJ: āṬRJTGETĪTTTĀYATI] |
nirṇītatāvaddharmāṁśaprṣṭhapātitayā punaḥ || 262 1|
bhūyo bhūyaḥ samuddeśalakṣaṇātmaparīkṣaṇam |

Again, the ‘examination’ (parīkṣaṇa) (of an object) consists of the

repeated ‘enunciation’ (samuddeśa) and ‘definition’ (lakṣaṇa) that follows
after (some) aspect of (its) nature (dharmāṁśa) has been ascertained
(nirṇīta) to some degree (tāvat). (262cd-263ab)

‘The aspect of (the object’s) nature (dharmāṁśa) that has been
ascertained (nṇirṇīta) to some degree’ is the one that has been made the object
of ascertainment and is the object of a limited degree of definition. The repeated
‘enunciation’ which has that as its object, and (its) ‘definition’, which is the
description of (its) unique attributes (and those it has in) common (with other
entities), constitute (its) ‘examination’ (parīkṣā), which is the observation
(īkṣaṇa) (of the object) again from all sides (paritaḥ), that is, in all respects, in
order to eliminate all (other possible) contrary views (as to its nature). This is
the meaning of (this) statement.

This triad consisting of ‘enunciation’ and the rest is found everywhere
(in all systematic expositions of a subject and enquiry into the nature of an
object). Thus, he says:

ÇRTĀHĪT-TGT-IĪTR]
ādd: ||/3ēē 1I
dṛṣṭānumānaupamyāptavacanādiṣu sarvataḥ || 263 ||
uddeśalakṣaṇāvekṣātritayaṁ prāṇināṁ sphuret |

TANTRĀLOKA
The

three

(moments)

of

‘enunciation’,

‘definition’

and

‘examination’ manifest in all respects (with regards to any valid means of

knowledge, whether) direct perception, inference, analogy or valid
testimony etc. of (all) sentient beings. (263cd-264ab)
He (now) explains this (series of four means of knowledge one by one)

in due order.

[iEkaEetiUHEEzeIzt.IEE ÚETIELHṬ

ma |
nirvikalpitam uddeśo vikalpo lakṣaṇaṁ punaḥ || 264 1|
parīkṣaṇaṁ tathādhyakṣe vikalpānāṁ paramparā |

(In relation to direct perception,) enunciation (corresponds to the
first moment of perception, which is) not conceptualized. Definition
(corresponds to the initial) conceptualization (of the object perceived)
(vikaḷpa). Examination (corresponds to) the series of conceptions
(concerning what) has been perceived directly in this way (initially).

(264cd-265ab)

‘Enunciation’ (uddeśa) (is such) because it is the cognition (prathā)

that has not (yet) been disclosed (and developed) of the mere (initial generic)
perception

(of the existence of an

object)

(ālocanamātra).

‘Definition’

(lakṣaṇa) (is such) because it is the cognition of its disclosed nature (namely,
the perception of particulars such as) “(this is) blue” formed by the thought
construct (vikalpa) relating to (the preceding phase of perception,) which is
devoid of thought constructs (and that mentally defines it). Their ‘examination’
(parīkṣā) is the production of a correct ascertainment of the nature of the object
on the basis of the (differentiated) ‘conceptions’ concerning the nature of the

antecedent and subsequent knowledge of its (particular) functional efficacy.'

! Abhinava now examines, one by one, how these three phases of enunciation,

definition and examination operate in all four valid means of knowledge. He begins with
direct perception.

' The functional efficacy of an entity is the fundamental criterion by which its specific

nature is known and confirmed to be as it is conceived to be (see above notes 1,604,
1,617, and 1,1042). We know water is water because it quenches thirst — thi

functional efficacy. The water of a mirage or seen in a dream cannot do that.

i

existence of a sub-atomic particle is confirmed by the trace it leaves behind on the

screen of a cyclotron. We will never be able to see it, but we know it exists because of
the effects it produces. We observe the functional efficacies of the things around us and
make use of them in our daily life all the time. When we pick up a packet containing tea
in the moming to make tea, we may check after we have made it that it is tea, not coffee
or fruit juice. We can do this because tea has a different effect on our taste buds. The
Buddhists were the first to formulate the notion that an entity is what it is and not

something else because it possesses a particular functional efficacy (arthakriyākāritva)
of its own. They needed to define the nature of things in this way because if everything


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


cd Tīī] |

raq 1

̄.NM] ÑŠÇṬIEYĪ TSĪTAH GATT II R II

Ék-biekUrúúḻEEIEEIĪ

nago 'yam iti coddeśo dhūmitvād agnimān iti || 265 ||
lakṣyaṁ vyāptyādivijñānajālaṁ tv atra parīkṣaṇam |
uddeśo ‘yam iti prācyo gotulyo gavayābhidhaḥ || 266 ||
iti vā lakṣaṇaṁ Śśeṣaḥ parīkṣopamitau bhavet |

svaḥkāma īdr̥g uddeśo yajetety asya lakṣaṇam || 267 ||
agniṣṭomādinety eṣā parīkṣā śeṣavartinī|
(If, for example, we take the inference: ‘on this mountain there is
fire because there is smoke’,) the enunciation is (simply) ‘this mountain’.

The object to be defined is ‘there is fire because there is smoke’.
Examination (in this case) is the conscious analysis (vijñānajāla) of the
(invariable) concomitance (vyāpti) (between the terms of the inference) and

the rest.

is equally transitory and composite and hence insubstantial, we cannot distinguish one
thing from another on the basis of their presumed ‘essential nature’ being different from

that of other things, as there is no such ‘own nature’. Clearly, nonetheless, one thing
differs from another, and that is because each ‘thing gives rise to its own specific
effects. Saivites have no problem with the existence of the ‘own nature’ of entities. But

as nondualists, it is ultimately just one ‘own nature’ that all things possess. They are all

equally consciousness manifesting in some particular form. So they too adopt the same
criterion to specify and differentiate one entity from another ~ the examination of the
functional (or one could also call it causal) efficacy of something before it gives rise to
its effects, and afterwards confirms or otherwise what it is believed to be, that is, the
notion formed in the previous phase of ‘definition’.

Now Abhinava goes on to explain how these three phases relate to those of

inference.
! By ‘invariable concomitance’ (vyāpti) is meant the invariable presence of the
probans (that is, the means by which one can infer the nature of something which is not

directly perceived) in concomitance with the probandum, which is to be inferred. In this

case, the probans is smoke, which is invariably concomitant with fire. These then are

the five basic elements of the Indian syllogism: 1) the locus of the inference,
exemplified in this case by the mountain. 2) The means by which the nature of the
inferred object is ascertained, in this case, the smoke. 3) The object of the inference, in
this case, the fire. 4) The invariable concomitance of these two which is established by

5) referring to other instances. In this case, we observe that although it is possible for
there to be fire without smoke, there is never smoke without fire as, for example, when
cooking on a log fire. Thus, according to the Nyāya, a syllogism has five members.

These are: 1) Statement of that which is to be proved (pratijñā) — ‘there is fire on the hill

TANTRĀLOKA

Oṟ eelse (analogously), with respect to postulation (as, for

example, ‘this animal, which is similar to a cow, is called a wild cow?), the
enunciation is the initial (notion) ‘this (animal) and the definition is ‘that
which is similar to a cow is called a wild cow (gavaya)’. The examination
(concerns) the rest (of the features of the animal). Similarly, (the same may
be said of, for example, the statement: “he who desires heaven should

sacrifice with Agniṣṭoma.” '") TṬhe enunciation (in this case is) such: ‘he
who desires heaven’, its definition ‘should sacrifice’, and the examination
the rest, that is, ‘with Agniṣṭoma etc’. (265cd-268ab) (264-266)

(If, for example, we take the inference: ‘on this mountain there is fire

because there is smokeʼ,) the ‘enunciation’ is ‘this mountain’, because (all that

is) perceived is just the possessor of the attribute (i.e. smoke) as being the
attribute of that which has to be established (sādhya) (i.e. the fire) that has not
(yet) been disclosed.

‘The object of examination’ is such because the

perception (of the mountain) has been disclosed as that which is qualified by the
attribute (i.e. smoke) of that which has to be established (i.e. fire).
‘Concomitance’ (vyāpti) (is the invariable concomitance of fire and smoke such

that when one) is present or absent (the other is also). It is due to that that (a
correct) ascertainment (niścaya) of the invariable concomitance of that which is

to be inferred and the means by which it is established, arises. This is the nature
of ‘the examination’ of this (concomitance).
(In the case of an analogy serving as a means of knowledge,) ‘this
(animal)ʼ (is the enunciation,) as it is the perception of just the body which is
present in front as being that which has not (yet) been disclosed. ‘The initial
(notion)ʼ is the first (phase of perception), which is not predicated (avacchinna)
by the particulars of the possessor of the attributes (of the animal which is being
identified). ‘This (animal) is similar to a cow’ (is the notion) on the plane of
the means of knowledge; ‘should be called a wild cow’ is on the plane of the
(successful) result (of the postulation) because the particulars by which it is
specifically determined (avaccheda) are (perceived to be) present. The word
‘or’ is in the sense of ‘in addition to’ (with reference to) the definition (that
follows), pertaining to the plane of the means of knowledge and in relation to
the plane of (the successful) result (of the process of postulation which is its
because there is smoke. 2) Statement of reason (hetu) — ‘wherever there is smoke there
is fire.’ This corresponds to invariable concomitance (vyāpti). 3) Statement of a general
rule supported by an example (udāharaṇa) — ‘as is the case with fire in the kitchen.”
4) Application of the rule (upanaya) — ‘there is smoke on the hill as in a kitchen. )
Conclusion (nigamana) — ‘there is fire on the hill.” Abhinava reduces these five to the

three phases of enunciation, definition and examination.

'ÚAccording to some logicians it is necessary to distinguish between inference

(anumāna) and ‘postulation’ (arthapatti), whereas others maintain that the latter is a
form of the former. Anyway, Abhinava now goes on to show how the same three phases
also operate in relation to coming to know the nature of an unknown object by
‘postulation’, that is, analogy, and its similarity with something else that is known.

'" The Agniṣṭoma is an important Vedic sacrifice offered in the spring. It took a
number of days, during which Soma was extracted from a plant and offered in the
sacrificial fire to the gods.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘definition’), because it is a perception of the disclosed nature (of the object, i.e.

that it is a wild cow). “The rest (of the features of the animal) include the
awareness (that the animal) possesses a dewlap (sāsnā) etc. and that it can serve

as a vehicle and be milked etc.
‘(Also) suchī’ (may be said with regards to the statement: “he who
desires heaven should sacrifice with Agniṣṭoma etc.”). The definition of ‘he
who desires heaven’ (i.e. ‘should sacrifice’) is such because there is no

ascertainment (nirṇaya) of a distinction between the connection with the field
(viṣaya) (of operation of the injunction) and the competence (adhikāra) (to
execute it, and so needs to be defined).' According to the saying: (it is called)
the rest because it is the ultimate goal (that remains to be attained)’, ‘the rest’
(is the definition of how this should be done, that is, ‘with Agniṣṭoma’). It is the

activity (vyāpāra) which is the eulogy (arthavādavyāpara) (of the importance
of what needs to be done) and so is what should be done. This is the meaning.
‘Examination’ here (in this context) is such, because it is the means by which
(every detail concerning) the competence (to sacrifice etc.) on the part of one
who desires heaven that has been enunciated and defined is freed from the chaff

(of uncertainty) (nistuṣīkaraṇa).

Surely (one may ask,) it has been said that ‘enunciation’ is the emission
of the universal in accord with the expectation of (the required) particulars that

are to be emitted. (But) is it not improper (that) the particular be an object of

expectation, because at that time there is not even just (a hint of its) presence as
something that will be in the future? He counters this doubt by first repeating by

way of explanation the characteristic described before to further aid (our

understanding).

ÑīhrcaāqPṬAKĪTITTYTHGTIT: || 2ē¢ I1

aaṁ: aazīvīā || qēR II
vikalpasrakṣyamāṇāny arucitāṁśasahiṣṇunaḥ || 268 ||
vastuno yā tathātvena sṛṣṭiḥ soddeśasaṁjñitā |
tadaiya saṁvic cinute yāvataḥ srakṣyamāṇatā || 269 ||
The emission (sṛṣti) in that way of a (generic) entity (vastu) that can
sustain the other aspects that are desired (to satisfy the need to know it),

which are to be emitted by the notion (vikalpa) (by means of which it is
12a2 The point is that the person who desires heaven is one who is fit to offer sacrifice by

virtue of his desire to do so. His relationship to the area of his effort, i.e. the offering of
the sacrifice, has not been clearly ascertained, and so needs to be defined.

' The question is, how can the present perception of the universal, undefined form

‘this is (something) have a sense of requiring or needing particulars for it to be a clear
perception of a specific object that is thus known to be what it is? Each perception is

self-confined and momentary. How can a present perception (of the universal undefined

form) require another (that is, its particulars) to complete it? How can a present
perception be known to be what it is by some future addition to it?

TANTRĀLOKA

identified), is termed ‘enunciation’ (uddeśa). At that very moment (of
enunciation, which is concomitant with the) impending emission
(srakṣamāṇatā) of that which is such (namely, the required aspects),

consciousness discerns it. (268cd-269) (267-268ab)

‘The notion’ (of the bare existence of an entity) is (such) because it is

the primary basis on which the perceiver has emitted the generic (form of that
which is to be conceptualized and defined). (The other aspects) ‘which are to
be emittedʼ in relation to that (and depending on it) are the future desired
outpourings (of the required aspects) by the definition (lakṣaṇa) (of the as yet

undefined object). Thus, the ‘other aspects’ are the particulars that are other

than the universal, and are ‘desired’ because they satisfy the perceiver (who
needs to know the object). In other words (arthāt), they are those (particulars)
that can be pervaded (by) that kind of generic entity (vastu) (as does a universal,
particulars). ‘The emission in that way’ as (the entity) which can sustain the
particulars characterized by the specific distinguishing (properties of the entity)

which are to be emitted etc. is its ‘enunciation’, that is, the naming (of it as that

which is to be elucidated). ‘At that very moment’ when the enunciation takes
place, insofar as (it is concomitant with the) impending emission

! The ‘enunciation’ of what is to be subsequently defined and examined takes place in

view of those two subsequent phases. We have already noted that the ‘enunciation’ of
an object of enquiry is like the chapter heading of a book, its definition is like the
headings of the sections of a chapter, and examination the chapter itself. ‘Enunciation’

is thus a generic statement of the content of the chapter, which is then conceptually
divided up into sub-headings. The writer then proceeds step by step, filling out the

contents of the chapter until it is complete. This is possible because everything he is
going to write is already present in his mind, held together in timeless consciousness, in

which ‘before’ and ‘after are not separated in time. The same happens whenever we
perceive an object through any means of knowledge, whether by direct perception,

inference or any other way. Initially the object is emitted in its most generic form as a
unitary apperception of the whole. It is already known but not yet clearly defined in all
its aspects and details. These are then filled in by the thought constructs that cluster

around the original generic nucleus, which serve to identify and know it in all its
specific details. These are formed through a series of choices between possible
alternatives — accepting those that are correct and rejecting those that are not.
The enquiring state of consciousness that articulates itself as ‘what is this?’

coincides with the first moment of creation in which the generic object is emitted from
consciousness, which is destroyed at the time of the answer, when the particular

defining features of the object are emitted from consciousness and the generic object is

withdrawn. What is to be emitted (srakṣamāṇa) to fill in some of the evident details

necessary to identify the object appears in the second moment, in which more features
of the object are emitted. These should be sufficient to define the object, although the

object is not yet fully manifest. However, if that does not happen, doubt arises; for

example, when one sees a tree on a foggy night and a doubt may arise that is articulated

in the question ‘is this a man or a tree? Further presentation of particulars that allow the

discernment that ‘this is a tree, not a man’ result in the form of consciousness termed

‘definition’ (lakṣaṇa). Abhinava maintains that this can only be possible because

everything is already known implicitly by non-temporal and omnipresent consciousness.
Thus, even though one aspect of consciousness questions, it already knows the answer,
and so when it hears the right answer proffered by the other aspect of consciousness that
responds, it accepts it to be true.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


(srakṣamāṇatā) `of that which is such’, that is, of the required (desired)
particular, ‘consciousness discernsʼ, that is, investigates it (anusaṁdhatte).

This is the meaning. The reason there (that accounts for how that is possible) is:


iuākēaczāīci|EbEĀeEzItczzed

yato hy akālakalitā saṁdhatte sārvakālikam |
Indeed, (this is possible) because the condition (of consciousness)

which is that of being unmeasured by time (akālakalitā) discerns all that is

temporal (of all times, past, present and future) (sārvakālika). (270ab)
(268cd)
The word ‘indeed’ serves to embellish (this) statement.

Surely (one may ask,) as ‘definition’ (lakṣaṇa) is the perception of both
the universal and the particulars when the perception of the disclosed nature (of
the object of enquiry) takes place, what (then) is the object of (this phase of
perception termed) ‘definition’? And what is (the state of consciousness termed)
‘definition’? As there is no discerned difference (viveka) here (of this), there

would be no constraint (niyama) (on it being this or that).® With this doubt in
mind, he says:

' Gnoli translates verses 267-268 as follows: ‘Enunciation is the emission of an entity

that is susceptible to being defined by a future emission of other differentiated

representations, desired (by the cogitating subject). All these elements, which are about
to be emitted, are discemed by consciousness then in all their extension which,
unmeasured as it is by time, discerns everything that is born in time (past, present and
future).”

' A note in Sanskrit at the bottom of the printed Sanskit text says: ‘f the prior

generic state (sṭhiti) is one in which the particulars have not been made manifest and the
particulars arise subsequently, because the universal and the particulars are perceived
separately, then the condition in which there is (a relationship between) the object of

definition and the definition obtains. However, if the particulars were to be present in

the prior generic state, then here (in this
case) there would be no mutual constraint
(niyama) (such that the object of definition can invariably be coupled with its
definition). The point is that (as the saying goes) ‘the conjunction of two things (which

are unrelated) in one place would be faulted by the defect called ‘intermixture’

(saṁkara) (which is confusing)ʼ.
The generic aspect of the object that is perceived initially is identified as, for
example, a man. Its ‘enunciation’ is ‘this is a man’. After this, the particular qualities of
the object are made manifest. In this case they are, for example, the man’s height, the
limbs of his body, the clothes he wears, and so on. These serve to define the generic
figure of the man as some particular person. If the two aspects, generic and particular,

are perceived together in the second moment of definition, they would not be two
separate things. For a relationship between two or more things to be possible, they must

be separate, distinct entities. This would not be the case as the generic and the particular
aspects are seen together as one thing. Then the second phase, that is, definition, would

be redundant. The problem is partially solved by admitting that the two moments in
which first the generic and then the particular are perceived are separate. But then the
problem would arise that there would be no necessary connection between the two.

There would be no ‘constraint’ that imposes that the generic should be defined in a

TANTRĀLOKA

-t
a]I z
gfīē: J-TRTT
UT]

TūATT: I|Q.0 ||

SJTITTT J JI āftcwōāīŪīg=xā|

srakṣyamāṇasya yā sṛṣṭiḥ prāksṛṣṭāṁśasya saṁhr̥tiḥ lI 270 ||
anūdyamāne dharme sā saṁvillakṣaṇam ucyate |
Definition (lakṣaṇa) is said to be (a form of) consciousness wherein
the emission of what is to be emitted (namely, the particulars, coincides)

with a reabsorption of the aspect previously emitted (namely, the

universal,) when the nature (dharma) (of the object) is not (yet) clearly
manifest (anūdyamāna). (270cd-271ab)
Here (in this context), ‘definition’ is (a form of) ‘consciousness’ which
consists of the emission and withdrawal of the spheres of the particulars and the

universal; it is the seed (cause) of the activity of daily life. There (in that

context, that state of consciousness) should be called ‘definition’ as that which
is to be affirmed (vidheya) of the particular aspect which is being emitted. The
universal aspect which is to be withdrawn as that which is not (yet) clearly

manifest is the object of definition. Such is the discerned difference (viveka)
(between them).
Surely (one may ask,) it was said that the ‘examination’ (parīkṣaṇa) (of

an object) consists of repeated ‘enunciation’ (samuddeśa) and ‘definition’

(lakṣaṇa).’ (Now) there (in that case, does this not entail that) the (process

of) examination would not come to rest, because there is no reason (nimitta)
for
it to come to an end (in a satisfactory conclusion)? He counters this doubt,

(advancing a reply) that includes an explanatory illustration (anuvāda)' (of
what he has said).

I|ʼ 3192

1I

tatpr̥ṣṭhapātibhīūyoṁśasṛṣṭisaṁhāravibhramāḥ || 271 ||
parīkṣā kathyate mātrrucitā kalpitāvadhiḥ |

‘Examination’ is said to consist of the repeated movements to and

fro (vibhrama) of the emission and absorption of (the successive) aspects (of
cognition, namely ‘enunciation’ and ‘definition’,) that follow on from that
specific way by the particulars. In other words, anything perceived initially generical
ly
could be anything else when the particulars are perceived. The man we saw initially and
said ‘this is a man’ could turn out to have the attributes of a dog or a cat or,
indeed,
anything else. Thus, the defect of a confusing ‘intermixture’ would be the result.

Above 1/263ab (261cd). Read samuddesa- for samuddveśa-.

' The new aspects that specify and enrich with details the notion being discussed are

called by Mīmāṁsakas, vidhi (‘affirmations’ or ‘rulesʼ), and those that
are specified,
that are preexistent and generic, are called anuvāda, that is, a passage which
explains
and illustrates these ‘affirmations’ or ‘rules'. See Gnoli 1985: pp. 296-297.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


(moment of ‘definition’). Its end is determined (arbitrarily) in accord with
(the satisfaction of) the desire of the perceiver." (271cd-272ab)
Surely (one may ask,) it is said that the power of reflective awareness

consists of the wonder of (being aware of the consciousness which is) oneʼs

own nature (svātmacamatkāra). (As Supreme Speech,) it unfolds progressively
wherever direct perception (inference) and the rest (take place) as the (three
forms of Speech, namely, that of) Vision, the Middle One and the Corporeal. So
why is this referred to here as a different process, namely, ‘enunciation’ and the
rest, which is (part of the discourse of the philosophy of the Nyāya, but is) not
well known in one’s own philosophy? With this doubt in mind, he says:

IṬYGrJ
TĀTĪṬ ṜāaTĪ aI āT IT. I| Q92 1

prāk paśyanty atha madh
vaikharī ceti tā imāḥ || 272 ||
parā parāparā devī caramā tv aparātmikā |
Now,

these

(three

moments

of

enunciation,

definition

and

examination are equivalent to three levels of Speech, namely,) first the
(Speech of) Vision (paśyantī), then the Middle (Speech) (madhyamā) (which

is that of thought) and Corporeal (Speech) (vaikharī). They are the

Goddess Parā (Supreme), Parāparā (Middling) and the last one, which is

Aparā (the Lower One), (respectively). (272cd-273ab)

' Cf. above, 1/259. If, for example, we see a standing figure on a foggy night and try

to identify it, we may first emit the idea that ‘this is a man’, but are not fully satisfied
that we have identified the object correctly. Thus, we withdraw that notion and emit
another, such as ‘this is a pillar’. But if we are not satisfied, we withdraw that notion

also and emit another such as ‘this is a tree’. Then, if that also does not seem right, we
may revert to the first one, emitting it again, this time, perhaps, adding more details so
that the notion forms ‘this is a man with arms and a headʼ. This process of examination

continues until we are satisfied that ‘yes, indeed, this is a man not a pole or a tree or
anything else.”

' Concerning these three levels of Speech, see above, note 1,225.
'! Maheśvarānanda quotes this and the following verse in the course of his explanation

of verse 50 of his Mahārthamañjari:
‘Corporeal (Speech) is (the power of) action. The Middle (form of) Speech is
made of (the power of) knowledge. Again, the (Speech of) Vision is (the power of) the

will. The Subtle One is the state of the oneness of them all.’
The reality which is Speech is thus divided into four kinds, namely, in due
order, the Subtle One, the Speech of Vision, the Middle One and the Corporeal. As is
said in the Sāmbapañcā

‘She utters the sixty-three letters from Mitrāvaruṇa’s abode and gives birth

here by means of the evident organs (of speech) by virtue of (her) association with the
vital breath. I offer reverence to that (Speech of) Vision, who has arisen first, to the
Middle One located in the intellect, and the Corporeal Speech (located) in the mouth,
which is clear (and well-articulated) by the organs (of speech).”

TANTRĀLOKA

(In the PTv the three, Parā, Parāparā and Aparā, are, respectively, the first,
second and third person, singular, dual and plural.)
Surely (one may object that) the three, ‘enunciation’ and the rest, (are
said to be) the Speech of Vision etc. simply because they are equal in number.

Whatis this (triad)? With this doubt in mind, he says:


frtra 11 3.93 1
icchādi śaktitritayam idam eva nigadyate || 273 ||
There (in that regard), the Speech that is well known as Corporeal, as the pulse
that develops by the functioning of the palate and the other organs (of speech), is
ascertained to be the power of action. Again, the Middle One is impelled solely by the

activity of the intellect and so is the power of knowledge. Again, (the Speech of) Vision
is the will, because her nature is the consent to extend outwards, for (in accord with) the
etymology (of her name, she) is the Supreme Speech that sees. The nature of the Subtle

One is the blended state of the three aforementioned (forms of) Speech (that are one
within it), on the analogy of the juice of a peacock's egg. (ts) condition (vṛtti) is the
exertion of the Supreme Lord who is the inner perceiver. Again, the Supreme Speech of
that same ŚSupreme Lord (constantly) enters His essential nature and (there) pulses
radiantly. As our teacher has said in the venerable Ṛjuvimarinī:
‘Mātṛkā (the goddess who is the alphabet) is Supreme Speech and is the
essential nature of Supreme Śiva, Who is the Lord (bhaṭṭāraka) Unstruck Sound. (She

is) consciousness that is the cause of the flowing forth of the thirty-six principles.’
The status of (the word) ‘speech’ is philologically derived as active (direct

speech), i.e. ‘it speaks to himʼ not ‘it is said’, as accords with a passive construction. As

my grand-teacher has said in the venerable Saṅvitstotra:
‘The most excellent and venerated teachers say that You are Supreme Speech
that is not separate from the universe. Your nature the reflective awareness of your own

Light, they support the etymology (of the word) ‘speech’ as that which speaks (vakti).’
Therefore, it is said that all the play of Speech consists of the unfolding
development (vistāra) of the three powers of will (knowledge and action). As (is said) in

the Yoginīḥr̥daya:

‘Then this is the power of the will, who abides as the body of (the Speech of)

Vision. In the same way the power of knowledge is Jyeṣṭhā, who is said to be the
Middle Speech. The power of action is this (goddess) Raudrī, who is Corporeal Speech,
and her form is all things.”

[Maheśvarānanda then quotes this and the following verse and goes on to

comment:]
Will and the rest (of the powers of knowledge and action) is the radiant pulse

(sphuratta) of one’s own Self, and of that nature is some (higher indefinable) perception

(anubhūti) which is the reality of Mantra (mantra). Thus, everything is consistent. Will
and the Speech of Vision, by mutually exchanging places as that which is being
indicated (uddesya) and as that which is to be adopted (upādeya), another reality (artha)
is (thereby) illumined. ‘There is no noetic experience (pratyaya) in the world that is not

associated with word.' In accord with this teaching, everything right up to the subject’s
own nature is made of Speech and does not go beyond it. And so it is that the power of
reflective awareness alone is the very life of the Self, the nature of which is the Light (of
consciousness). And that (reflective awareness which is Speech) is what is indicated by
many words such as ‘Mantra’ and ‘worshipʼ (pāūjā). The only difference (between them)

is that each one is only just a particular channel (dvāra) (through which Speech
operates). MM p. 123-125.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


'This (triad) is said to be the three powers, namely, will

(knowledge and action). (273cd) (272ab)
that:

The relationship between (this teaching and what was said) before is

TGTfT TATĀ -aē: JTTĀT |
etatprāṇita evāyaṁ vyavahāraḥ pratāyate |
This commerce of daily life (vyavahāra) takes its course impelled by
this (triad). (274ab) (272cd)

A note at the bottom of the Sanskrit text says: ‘The meaning is just this, namely, that

the daily commerce of life (vyavahāra) which is indicated as being in the form of the
three, Rudreśa and the rest, by fettered perceivers, because (it is the domain of) thought
constructs, is here, when pure, described as the (triad) of will, (knowledge and action,

and) as that which is to be adopted.”

' Maheśvarānanda (MM p. 124) first quotes the YHṛ 1/38, 40cd and then TĀ 1/272cd-

274ab (271-272). According to the YHṛ:

icchāśaktis tadā seyaṁ paśyantīvapuṣā sthitā |
jñānaśaktiṣṭathā jyeṣṭhā madhyamā vāgudīritā || 38 |I
kriyāśaktiṣṭu raudrīyaṁ vaikharī viśvavigrahā l| 40cd II
‘Then this is the power of the will, that abides as the body of (the Speech of)
Vision. In the same way the power of knowledge is Jyeṣṭhā, who is said to be the
Middle Speech. The power of action is this (goddess) Raudrī, who is Corporeal Speech,
and her form is all things.” YHṛ 1/38, 1/40cd

says:

Just after citing TĀ 1/272cd-274ab (271-272) Maheśvarānanda (MM p. 125)

icchādiṣyabhāvaiva ca svātmasphurattā | tanmayī ca kācid anubhūtir mantraśabdārtha
iti
sarvaṁ
.saṁgacchate
1|
vyatyāsenārthāntaram api dyotyate |

.icchā

punaḥ

paśyantītyuddeśyopādeyayor

na so ʻsti pratyayo loke yaḥ śabdānugamādṛte | iti nītyā sarvo ‘pi pramātr̥svabhāvaḥ

paryantato vāṅmayatāṁ nollaṅghayati | tataś ca prakāśarūpasyātmano vimarśaśaktir
evānuprāṇanam | sā ca mantrajapapūjādyanekaśabdavyapadeśyā bhavati | kevalaṁ tat

tad dvāramātram eva bheda iti l| 5O II

‘The radiant pulse of one’s own Self is the (powers of) will, (knowledge and
action). And there is a certain (inscrutable) perception (anubhiūti) which is the reality
(expressed) by the words of Mantras. Thus, everything is coherent (and makes sense).
Again, the will is (the Speech of) Vision. Substituting these two, one with the other, as
what is being discussed and what needs be taken up, another meaning (becomes)
apparent. (This is expressed in the statement): ‘there is no perception in the world that is
not associated with words. In accord with this principle, there is nothing (whatsoever),

right up to the essential nature of the perceiver, that transcends its (essential condition)
as Speech (vāṅmaya). Thus, the power of reflective awareness the Self, which is the

Light of consciousness, possesses is that which impels (and gives it life). And that

TANTRĀLOKA

The sense (of this verse) is that all this ‘commerce of daily life’, pure

and impure,' manifests on the screen of consciousness. That is said (in the
following verse):

‘In this way, the commerce of daily life, impure as well as pure, is
experienced within the All-pervasive Lord Who scintillates with the

manifestations of (the many) extremely different things.”

Not only is their nature such, such is also that of the (various forms of)

relationship (between the teacher and the taught) mentioned in the following

(reflective awareness) is denoted by many words such as ‘Mantra’, ‘the repetition of
Mantra’ (apa) and ‘worship’ (pūjā) etc. The only difference (between these things) is

only that particular door (through which this reflective awareness operates).’
' The ‘pure’ aspect of daily experience and activity is the perceiver and agent, who is
always one and the same. The ‘impure’ aspect is the object of knowledge and action,

which is invariably multiple and diverse. Another way of understanding this distinction

is that the ‘impureʼ level is the sphere of Māyā, that encompasses the first thirty-one
principles from Earth to Māyā. The ‘pure’ level includes the five higher principles
beyond up to Śiva. A note at the bottom of the page of the printed text suggests a third
interpretation. There we read: ‘the point here is that the commerce of daily life is taught
(by others) to be a state of thought (conceived by) the fettered perceivers in the form of
the three, Rudreśa and the rest, (and so is to be rejected). The same is said here to be

pure, as that which is to be adopted in the form of (the powers of) the will and the rest.”
The three perceivers presumably correspond to those called Conditioned (Sakala),
Dissolution
Deconditioned
(Pralyākala)
and
Consciousness
Deconditioned
(Vijñānākala). See above note 1,658 to 1/77-80 (78-81) and below, note 4,91 to 4/29-30.

' Read with MS Kh atyantabhinnārthā- for atyarthabhinnārthā-.
! Jayaratha introduces with this reference the next topic, namely, the six types of

relationship between the teacher and the taught. This reference may be drawn from the

Kularamamālā, which Abhinava paraphrases below in verse 1/275cd-276ab (274). But
this may well not be so. Jayaratha quotes a verse that is from there in the commentary
on the following verse that is much closer to this one, and so more likely to be

Abhinava’s source. It is more likely that Jayaratha is citing a source that states the
standard number of six types of relationships between the teacher and the taught. This is

what we find, for example, in the first ṣarka of the JY (MS Kh fl. 166b-167a), where
this subject is discussed at length (see Dyczkowski 1988: 102-104). The JY explains
that the Lord’s body is pure consciousness. Thus, when he wishes to generate this
relationship through the production of scripture, a movement (pravṛtti) arises within him
that issues out of the transcendental, unmanifest state. Kuṇḍalinī, the power of
consciousness and speech latent within him, is aroused by the fullness of the growing
intensity of this movement, and so straightens to become a manifest resonance (svara)
within consciousness. Śiva is in this way filled with the energy of speech and so

assumes the form of the aggregate of all phonemic sounds (śabdarāṣi), here identified

with Sadāśiva who, eternal (sadā) and possessing Śiva’s nature, is ever at the upper

level (ārdhvasthāna). Sadāśiva reflects upon the manifest universe as consisting

essentially of two categories, namely, the ‘listener’ and the ‘speaker’. This is the one
relationship (saribandha) through which the meaning of scripture is communicated.

Therefore, although these two aspects of a single reality and the relationship between
them is undivided, it is of various types according to the level of its manifestation,
namely:


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


mahac cānantarākhyaṁ ca tathāvāntaram eva ca |
divyaṁ miśram adivyañ ca ṣoḍhā saṁbandhalakṣaṇam || JY 1/35/96 (MS K fl. 304a,

MS Kh fl. 167a)

‘Great (mahat): that between consciousness and its power. 2) Subsequent
(ānantara): that between Sadāśiva and the Vīras. 3) Intermediate (avāntara): that
between he who awakens and he who is awakened. 4) Divine (divya): the relationship

between Sadāśiva as he who awakens and the divine beings below him up to the level of
Maāyā. 5) Mixed (vniśra): that between divine beings and sages. 6) Other than Divine
(adivya): that between sages and ordinary men.’

Generally, as here, the relationships are six, whereas Abhinava states that there

are five. This is unusual, although we do find this number elsewhere also as, for
example, in the Spandapradīpikā (p. 84), where they are called ‘Supreme’ (para),
‘Great” (mahat), ‘Divine’ (divya), ‘Oṭher than Divine’ (divyetara) and ‘Mutual’

(itaretara). Abhinava appears to be aware of this difference, and so explains that there
are only five relationships but that they are all aspects of the one supreme relationship,
which is therefore not counted separately. See Dyczkowski 1992a: 140 and 360 n 8 for
more concerning the five types of relationship (saṅbandha) between the teachers of the

scriptures and their disciples.
If this reference is the basis of TĀ 1/275cd-276ab (274), it is drawn from the
Kularamamālā, which Abhinava tells us is his source. Jayaratha takes the trouble to say
that ‘(Abhinavaguptais paraphrasing) the sense (of what) is saidin the ‘Ratnamālā’

thatis, the venerable Kularatṇamālā; (heis not quoting) word for word.” (ad 1/275cd
276ab (274)). This may be so even though Abhinava says that there are not six, but only
five forms of relationship between the teacher and the taught, in accord with their
respective nature. The wording is close enough for this be possible. Compare the

Sanskrit of this verse (A) with Abhinava’s version (B):


(A) paro mahānantarālo divyo miśras tv adivyakaḥ |

saṁbandhaḥ ṣaḍvidhas tantre

(B) . . . . . . . ;sarvaḥ parakalātmakaḥ || 275 ||

mahān avāntaro divyo miśro ‘nyo ‘nyas tu pañcamaḥ |
We observe that in the place of antarālo we find avāntaro, both of which
equally mean ‘intermediate’. The difference can be explained quite plausibly as the

result of changes in the transmission of the text, but also as an indication that the source
is not the same (see below). According to Abhinava’s exegesis, the five relationships are
all aṣpects of the one supreme relationship (which is that between the God and the

Goddess), and so is not counted as a separate relationship. Rather it is all of them

viewed in the different perspectives of a hierarchy of revelation transmitted down from
higher beings to those ofa successively lower order.

Note however that Jayaratha also quotes the following in his commentary ad

1/275cd-276ab (274), in which there are indeed five, and is closer to Abhinava’s
wording than (A), which thus may not be from the Kularatnamālā.
(C) mahān avāntaro divyo divyādivyaś caturthakaḥ |
itaretaramārgeṇa pañcadhā bhinnalakṣaṇaḥ ||

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The relationship (between teacher and taught is said to be) of six kinds
in the Tantra (namely,) ‘Supremeʼ, ‘Great’, ‘Intermediate’, ‘Divine’, ‘Mixed’

and ‘Human’ (adivyaka)


Accordingly, he says:


The Supreme and other Relationships

TGJTYĪĪTTITTTḤ ṬTTHHŪJTTĪHT |I Q9Z |I
THÑTRKTTTĪJTHTJṀ|

etatpraśnottarātmatve pārameśvaraśāsane || 274 ||
parasaṁbandharãpatvam abhisaṁbandhapañcake |

In the Supreme Lord’s teaching, consisting of such questions and
answers, the essential nature of the supreme relationship (between teacher
and disciple) is present there within the five (types of their) relationships

(as their basis). (274cd-275ab)

The ‘questions and answersʼ, the nature of which has been explained

previously, consist, that is, have as their nature (this) reality which, being so, is
the relationship between the one who questions and the one who replies. This is
the sense. (It is present) ‘in the five relationships’, beginning with the ‘Great’
one. The sixth is the supreme relationship, which is present in all of them as the
one that vitalizes them. Thus, it is not mentioned here separately.

‘(Relationship) is of five kinds, (each with its own) separate characteristic.
(These are) ‘Great’, ‘Intermediate’, ‘Divine’, and ‘Divine-cum-Non-divine’ as the
fourth, along with the ‘Mutual’ path.’

The sixth relationship, not mentioned in this verse, is presented in the

preceding citation (ad 275cd-276ab), which is certainly from the Kularamamālā, as the
mutual penetration (āveśa) of Śiva and Śakti. Thus, it appears to be more likely that the

verse cited here (ad 274ab) is not from the Kularatnamāḷā.

' MVV Chapter 2:

The consciousness itself that is (applied) here (to this) teaching is said to be the
teacher. For it utters (girati) the universe in conjunction with (its) emanation and
withdrawal. The primary establishment here (in this, the teacher’s consciousness,) is
said to be the supreme relationship (saṁībandha) (between the teacher and the taught).

The

knowledge

taught

(sāṁsiddhika). (262-263)

by

that

(consciousness)

accomplishes

(everything)

(That is) where our teachers are always established. It is from that that the

division (of the Śaiva teachings) comes forth. Also, (this) is where it was said before
that oneness with ignorance is destroyed. Thus, it illumines and lays hold of the
wonderful variety of one’s own consciousness (which includes the other relationships
between teacher and taught, namely) ‘Intermediate’, ‘great’, ‘divine and ‘human’, and
the coming together of the scripture (that illumines) the limbs of one’s own speech
endowed with truth, which are the creations of the teacher. (264-266)

says:


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

We are not (just) voicing a view we have imagined ourselves. Thus, he

3q¥JīF ŪaTTIJIĀĪ Td: TTZĒTHĀ̄: II Q94,1I1

yathoktaṁ ratnamālāyāṁ sarvaḥ parakalātmakaḥ || 275 I|
mahān avāntaro divyo miśro ʻnyo ʻnyas tu pañcamaḥ |
As is said in the Ratnamālā, (the relationships termed) ‘Great’
(mahat), ‘Intermediate’ (avāntara), ‘Divine’ (divya), ‘Mixedʼ, which is
another, and the ‘Other’ (than divine), which is the fifth, are all the

Supreme Power. (275cd-276ab)

(Abhinavagupta is paraphrasing) the sense (of what) is said in the
‘Ratnamālā’, that is, the venerable Kularatnamālā; (he is not quoting) word for

word. There (we read):

“That which is not seen and is devoid of what is to be adopted and
rejected and (phenomenal) qualities, is said to be the fundamental reality of all
the principles of existence. And (that reality) with an invisible form is said to be
tranquil (and transcendent). Its will is the energy that has come forth endowed
with the (divine) quality of what possesses that nature.’

' Chapter Thirty-Six exemplifies in detail the relationships between the beings that

gave and received the teachings of the Siddhayogeśvarīmata in the course of its descent
to earth. They came down to earth progressively, transmitted from the teacher, whose

state is at a higher level in relation to his disciple, the recipient. Just as the disciple is
such in relation to the teacher at the level above him, so too, in his turn, he is a teacher
in relation to his disciple at a level below him. In this way, step by step, the teaching
travels down from Śiva, the supreme teacher, who is in the supreme state at the highest

level, down to man, who is in the lowest state at the lowest level. Scriptures commonly
describe their origin and progressive descent into the world in these terms. For example,
see the beginning of Chapter Thirty-Six below, where Abhinava summarizes the

account the SYM gives of its progressive transmission in such terms. In this case, there

are five levels with their corresponding types of relationships, said to be collectively
aspects of the supreme relationship, which is that of consciousness with its own power
of reflective awareness. This is the supreme level of the Goddess of Speech, who
streams down through all the levels of Speech and relationships. Thus, at the lower
levels, the relationship between the one who teaches and the taught implies both oneness

and difference. The level on which even the most subtle shade of difference has

disappeared and the two are in a state of absolute identity is the supreme relationship

(cf. PTv p. 13-15). Although all major schools of Śaivism agree that a series of
relationships is formed between the teacher and the taught in the course of a Tantra’s
‘descent to earth’, Abhinava stresses that from the Trika point of view they are all forms
of the supreme relationship, which is essentially an expression of the supreme power of
Speech (see below, note to 1/226cd (1/277ab)). What this means is that even at the

lowest level of transmission, that is, between a human teacher and disciple, the true
relationship between them is ultimately the supreme one between Śiva and Śakti.

TANTRĀLOKA

According to this (teaching), the Supreme Power of the Supreme
Goddess has come forth (into the world) as each one of these (types of)
relationships. Thus, it is said that all (forms of) relationship beginning with (the
one called) ‘Great’ are the Supreme Power. Thus, this very (passage from the

Kularatṇamālā) concludes with this (verse):

‘O goddess, it is said that the sixth (relationship) has come down onto

the surface of the earth following the path of emanation in accord with the
nature (and degree) of penetration (of Śiva’s power of grace).”

The ‘mixed’ (relationship is the one called) ‘Divine-cum-non-divine’

(between a deity and sage). It is ‘another and the ‘Other”’, with respect to the

Divine (relationship between two deities). The Mixed is another. The one which

is other than that also is the Non-divine (relationship between human beings).

Thought (vikalpa) arises three-fold as Divine, Divine-cum-Non-divine and Nondivine. Thuṣ, here that is called Mutual. That is said (in the Kularatnamālā):

‘(Relationship) is of five kinds (each with its own) separate
characteristic. (These are) ‘Great’, ‘Intermediate’, ‘Divine’, and ‘Divine-cumNon-divineʼ as the fourth, along with the ‘Mutual’ path.’
One should understand this group of five relationships to be, in due

order, the one between Śiva and Sadāśiva (which is ‘Great’), then from him
to Anantanātha (which is ‘Intermediate’), and from him to Śrīkaṇṭha and

Nandikumāra etc. (which is ‘Divine’), and from them to the Rṣis, that is,

Sanatkumāra and the rest (which is ‘Divine-cum-Non-divine), and from them

also to (common) human beings (which is ‘Mutual’ or ‘Non-divine’). As is said

there itself (in the following passage in the Kularamamālā):

‘Śiva, Who is completely full, (perfect, all-embracing,) supreme and
unlimited radiant energy (tejas), possesses (one supreme) power (called)
Sādākhyā (The Existent One), Who operates in the field of the agency of Her

own (free) will (svecchākartṛtva). 1) (The wise) know the relationship that has
atṭained (its) being by that (relationship between them) to be the first (i.e.,
Great). 2) Again, in due order, the Intermediate One (takes place) in association

(with Śakti) (yogena),' and was received by the god Anantesa' from

' When a disciple has this relationship with his teacher, he experiences himself as

Sadāśiva and his teacher as Śiva. Similarly, depending on the level of his subjectivity,

he experiences himself as the corresponding being at that level and his teacher as the

perceiver on the level of development above him. At the lowest level, he experiences
himself as a fully bound individual soul in relation to his enlightened human teacher.

' The following passage is also quoted in the notes to the PTV (p. 12).
' One could translate the word ‘yogena’ as ‘by means of Yoga’, i.c. Ananta received it

from Sādākhya by means of Yoga. However, that way it is not possible to explain how
Sādākhyā is feminine in the first instance and denotes Śakti, whereas Sadākhya in the
second instance is masculine and denotes Sadāśiva. Jayaratha ignoring this problem
simply identifies the two, saying that the Great relationship is that between Siva and


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Sādākhya (i.e., Sadāśiva), and so is called the second one. 3) Again, the third
one, O goddess,is Śrīkaṇṭha, (who received it) along with Nandin. As both have
understood it in this way from a god, it is called Divine. 4) That was given to
the Ṛṣis by Nandin in a concise form and (so) (this), the fourth one, is called by
the Lord Divine-cum-non-divine. 5) The fifth is the Mutual One, which is in the
form of the (human) disciple and teacher (that is formed) in association with the

systematic explanation (vyākhyānakrama) (of the scriptures) in the course of

worshipping the Seat of Knowledge (vidyāpītha). This is said to be the
relationship (between the teacher and the taught,) which is of five kinds.”
(Now) he describes the nature of the Supreme Power.

bhinnayoḥ praṣṭṟtadvaktroś caikātmyaṁ yat sa ucyate || 276 ||
(A relationship in this sense) is said to be the unity that (is
established) between the two different (polarities, of which) one is he who
inquires and (the other) he who replies to that. (276cd) (275ab)
‘He who enquiresʼ is, for example, Sadāśiva, and the one who replies
in that case is Śiva. The word ‘that’ refers to the reflective awareness, whichis
the act of questioning (praśnakriyā). Although the two differ, there is a
relationship between them by virtue of the oneness which is the stability of
consciousness (engaged) in such a matter. (This is) because the nature of this
(relationship, as others,) is unity-in-difference (bhedābheda). (However,) if
a, although the text clearly says that it is between Śiva and Śakti (who is called
Sadākhyā). In order to solve thisinconsistency, I have translatedin this way.

' Anantais a form of Śiva whois generally saidin the Āgamas to be the creator and

governor of the cosmic order, ranging from Māyā down to the earth principle (see
8/305ab-307ab (8/304-306) and commentary). As such, he is said to be the Lord of
Maāyā, which he stimulates to generate the cosmic order below it (8/324ab, (8/323),
331ab-332cd (330cd-332ab)). He is also the Lord of the souls who reside in the sphere
of Māyā (8/336ab-349ab (8/345cd-348)). A different Anantais said to be the Lord of
one of the eight worlds associated with the Īśvara principle (8/342ab-344ab (8/341343)), which is just below that of Sadāśiva. Perhaps this is the one meant here. If so

Śrīkaṇṭha here can be identified with the Ananta who generates and governs the lower
priṅciples. Indeed, Śrīkaṇṭha is said to reside in Unmanifest Nature, andis responsible
for the destruction of all things within the domain of Māyā (6/150ab-151cd (6/149-

150ab)). However, it is quite possible that no such associations are meant in this
context.
' There are several possible meanings of the term ‘vidyāpīṭha’, the Seat of
Knowledge. It may refer to a sacred site (pītha), which in this case is unlikely. It may
also refer to the class or group (pītha) of scriptures. The term may also mean the sacred
plinth (pīṭha) on which manuscripts of the Tantras are placed to worship them. In that
sense, the worship of the Seat of Knowledge amounts to the worship of the scriptures

(see Dyczkowski 2009: intro. 3, 33 ff.). This seems to me to be the most likely meaning
here.

AII relationships involve something which is common to both the relata, otherwise

they could not be related. At the same time there must also be a difference between

TANTRĀLOKA

there is a state of (perfect) oneness because even the most subtle trace (gandha
lit. ‘scent’) of duality (bheda) has fallen away, then that would be a state of

plenitude, which is that of being all things, and the supreme relationship

(obtains). He says that.

saṁbandáhaḥ paratā cãsya pũrṇaikātmyaprathãmayṝ|

Its supreme state is the realisation (prathā) of complete oneness

(pūrṇaikātmya). (277ab) (275cd)

The ‘supreme state’ is ‘the realisation (prathā) of complete oneness
(pūrṇaikātmya). Everything is present (in that one reality, which is) complete
(pūrṇa). Iṭ is complete everywhere and so it is also present in (all) the five
relationships. Thus, it is rightly said that ‘they are all the Supreme Power’. That

is said (in the Trikahr̥daya):

them, otherwise they would not be two members of a relationship. Thus, all
relationships are a unity-in-difference.

' The level of relationship between its polarities — in this case the teacher who

embodies the consciousness that replies and the disciple who embodies the one that

questions — corresponds to the degree in which the difference between them is more or

less subtle. Thus, from this perspective, the Great relationship, which is the highest, is

that between Śiva, who is absolutely one and Sadāśiva, who embodies the state of

consciousness corresponding to the reflective awareness ‘I am He’. In that case there is
merely a trace of difference — just enough to experience the totality of all that exists as
Siva, Who is experienced objectively as ‘He’ Who I am. The supreme relationship is

said to be one in which every trace of objectivity is removed, and as such is the

plenitude (pārṇatā — a feminine word) of perfect oneness. In a sense, therefore, one
could say that this is not a relationship at all, and so only five are enumerated. But in

another sense, it is the oneness which is the essential basis of all the levels of
relationship between the teacher and the taught, which are thus aspects of it. In other

words, the plenitude of the perfect realisation of the oneness of consciousness arises

when consciousness itself experiences itself as all that there is and more beyond.
Everything is equally sacred consciousness. The human is divine. The limited fettered
soul is unlimited, free consciousness. Disciple and master are one.

' We know that Jayaratha is quoting the Trikahṛdaya because Kṣemarāja quotes the

same verse in his commentary on the Svacchandatantra and tells us its source (SvTu ad
8/38). A passage īin the Svacchandatantra (8/36-38) outlines the descent of its
transmission from Śrīkaṇṭha down to men through a downward progression of beings.
Kṣemarāja comments on it by framing the phases of the transmission in terms of this
sequence of five types of relationships (saṁbandha). He concludes by saying that: ‘it is
the Goddess herself who is the power Parā who sustains (and governs) the universe and
whose heart is a lake of the sentiment (rasa) which is the desire to grace (all) who,
having entered the body of each (of these) teacher (ācārya), bestows her grace. It is said
in this way that it is the supreme (form of) relationship that falls everywhere right down
to the human (non-divine) one. That is said in the Trikahr̥daya.’ He then goes on to

quote this verse.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

‘O Supreme Goddess, all (forms of) relationship (between the master

and disciple) are the Supreme Power, (whether) ‘Great’, ‘Intermediate’,
‘Divine’, ‘Mixed’ and the Non-divine (i.e. Human), that comes after that.”

Abhinava quotes the following reference from the Svacchandatantra in his
commentary on the Parātrīśikā. The same verse is quoted below in TĀv ad 35/26-27
note 35,24, where the commentary on this and following verses is translated.
guruśiṣyapade sthitvā svayaṁ devaḥ sadāśivaḥ |l
pūrvottarapadair vākyais tantram ādhārabhedataḥ |

‘Having established himself on the plane of teacher and disciple, the god

Sadāśiva (created) the Tantra by means of statements made of questions and answers,
based on the distinction between (their) ground (as the Lord and recipient of the
teaching).” (SVT 8/31cd-32ab)
‘In this way, the power of grace is perpetually present, and never sets within

every perceiver. Itis this supreme relationship which is the sole life of the essence of the
Trika scriptures. This is because here within the Absolute (Anuttara), according to the
aforementioned teaching, all the other relationships ~ Great, Intermediate, Divine,
Non-divine and the rest, are one with the Supreme One. That is said in the 7rikahr̥daya
(where we read): “the Supreme Lord, Who is always intent on emitting into His own
power, is grace by nature and, free of constraint, the creator and destroyer (of all

things).

Such is the ever emergent (immanent and active) state (in terms of) this
process. As the Supreme Lord, Who is consciousness, is the ultimate reality which is
such (at the supreme level of Speech), the inner reality which shines resplendent (within

him) as undivided is contemplated on the plane of the Speech of Vision as the (initial)

intention to differentiate the phrases, words and phonemes (that manifest on the
following levels of Speech). (Then,) on the plane of the Middle Speech, it is (in the
process of being) divided up, until it finally (comes) to possess (the form of) Corporeal
Speech, as the composition (racanā) of sentences made of up of separate (bhinna)
phenomenal (māyīya) phonemes and words . . . [of the statements of the scriptures] that
concern (and are based on) reality (vastupāūrvaka).

That is itself the invisible face of Bhairava, which is the reflective awareness of

emission (visarga). It is the arousal (kṣobha) which is the attainment of the union of

Śiva and His Power in the form of the letters A (which stands for anuttara, the

Absolute) and Ā (which stands for ānanda, bliss) (respectively), the essence of which is

the Absolute (corresponding to Śiva) and (pure) ‘T consciousness (corresponding to His
power). This is the seed of the unfolding flow (prasara) of the Trika scriptures, the
Stable Plane (dhruvapada), the Root (reality), and the vital principle of all living beings.

. . . The nature of reality (itself) (vastu) is question and its answer, ever emergent (and
active) (satatodita), which is initially (one and) undivided.

Thuṣ, such is here the (essential intended) sense (tātparya). One’s own Self,
which is by nature all things and is perceived by itself, contemplates itself by means of
question and answer, which are not separate from its own nature, as the subjectivity
(ahantā) consisting of the one who questions and the one who answers, thereby
(inspīring itself with) wonder. (The words of each particular scripture thus arise
progressively in consonance with the emergence of the desire that) ‘I wish (to
experience) this kind of diverse (and beautiful) wonder (vicitracamatkāra)’ and then,
knowing in that way, I am such (as exemplified by three sections of the Parātrīśikā)

beginning with ‘the goddess (asking), “how is the Absolute?” Then in the middle:

‘Bhairava said: “listen O goddess” up to (the words) “this is the Rudra couple (in

TANTRĀLOKA

He (now) transposes this same (notion) to the other (kinds of)

relationships (mentioned in the scriptures):

STTa T TTR-TĀTTTTTTT || QUŪ 1|1

anenaiva nayena syāt saṁbandáhāntaram apy alam || 277 1|
Śśāstravācyaṁ phalādīnāṁ paripūrṇatvayogataḥ |
The other relationships are also (to be understood in terms) of this
same principle so that the purport of the scriptures (may manifest) with the
fullness of its fruits and the rest. (277cd-278ab)
He sums up this (teaching).

atar || 3.c

itthaṁ saṁvid iyaṁ devī svabhāvād eva sarvadā || 278 |I
uddeśāditrayaprāṇā sarvaśāstrasvarūpiṇī |
In this way, consciousness, that is, this Goddess Who by Her very
nature and at all times is the life-breath of the three, namely, ‘enunciation’
and the rest, is all the scriptures. (278cd-279ab)

union)” (at the end). Or else (the same process can be understood to take place with

respect to) all the scriptures that originate from the five currents until they arrive
progressively to the (level of the) business of daily life. This is said to be the supreme

relationship (between the one who utters the teachings and the one who receives them).’
PTv pp. 12-16. Abhinava adds in the same PTv (p. 64-65):

‘Consciousness, the Goddess Parā, flows forth (spontaneously) by its very
nature. Parā is said to be the power of the will and (undivided from) Bhairava does not
divide Him. Her form is the power of knowledge etc. which are the attributes (of Her)
flow, and it sustains the body of the (Speech of) Vision and the rest (of the levels of
Speech), the nature of which are Parāparā and Aparā. Such is that act of reflection
(parāmarśana) on the nature of the form of (Her) flow which is the question the

Goddess, who poses questions of that nature, asks. The act of reflection on the nature of
that flow is said to be supreme, its nature indicative (rūpaka) of (both) that question and
the answer. Moreover, commencing from the inner state of the other consciousness (that
replies), the body of Bhairava which has internalized the entire flow. again serves as the

means of withdrawing the bliss of the dense (uninterrupted) supreme consciousness, and

unfolds perpetually in the form of the one who replies. These two, the flow and

withdrawal, are undifferentiated by time, and so this reality, which is their one nature, is

(both) question and answer. That is itself the supreme relationship (parasaṁbandha)
endowed with the state of the Absolute (anuttaratā). In the past the teachers have
described this as the wealth of the essence of Trika (ṣaḍardha).’


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


‘In this wayʼ, in the aforementioned manner, consciousness itself is

always this Goddess Who, by Her own freedom, as the life-breath of the three,

enunciation and the rest, is the scripture in its entirety. The meaning is that
consciousness itself manifests as the scriptures.
Well then, he (now) proffers there (in that regard) the enunciation (of
the topics of the Tantrāloka).
The Enunciation of the Topics of the Tantrāloka

TārzāT̄ Ṭ̄RJT. ṬĪÑTTSTĪ=TĪT || 2.3 1
[ERIEIĒFŪEIEĀHUIEE ḶĪGEATI

ITPĪṬTĪĪ TTUT: TAĪṬAĪṢ TTÑ; || 2¢o 11

GTIFATATTATI: JTF̄Tāikāītga || 3¢2 1

TTTTTTT ̄T ĀṬAI TI GṬJH: || 2¢R II

ÉrVISĀṀE-CTJLĒĀEFIiītakt’[sĪHTIEVEḤI

ḹ Jk
TÇ̄TTdI] H-HIĪ TSG HI-PĪITĪḤ:

1I| Ṝ¢3

1I

tatrocyate puroddeśah pūrvajānujabhedavān || 279 ||
ijñãnabhid gatopāyaḥ paropāyas tṛtīyakaḥ |
śāktopāyo naropāyaḥ kālopāyo ‘tha saptamaḥ || 280 ||
cakrodayo ‘tha deśādhvā tattvādhvā tattvabhedanam |
kalādyadhvādhvopayogaḥ śaktipātatirohir || 281 ||
dīkṣopakramaṇaṁ dīkṣā sāmay pautrike vidhau |
prameyaprakriyā sūkṣmā dīkṣā sadyaḥsamutkramaḥ |) 282 ||
goddhāro ʻbhiṣecanam |
śrāddhakīr̥ptiś ca śeṣavṛttinirūpaṇam || 283 ||
liṅgārcā bahubhitparvapavitrādi nimittajam |
rahasyacaryā mantraugho maṇḍalaṁ mudrikāvidhiḥ || 284 1|

ekīkāraḥ svasvarūpe praveśaḥ śāstramelanam |
āyātikathanaṁ śāstropādeyatvanirūpaṇam || 285 ||

There (in that context, now) will be stated the initial enunciation (of

the content of the Tantrāloka and then) in a subsequent (more detailed one)

than the one that follows, with (the corresponding) subsections.

TANTRĀLOKA

1)

The Types of Liberating Knowledge (vijñāna).

6)
7)
8)

The Temporal Means® (kālopāya)
The Arising of the Wheels (cakrodaya).™
The Path of Space.”” (deśādhvan).

2)
3)
4)
5)

9)

(Penetration into Ultimate Reality) Devoid of Means (Anupāya).
The Divine Means (śāmbhavopāya).
The Empowered Means (śāktopāya).
The Individual Means (āṇṉavopāya).

The Path of the Principles (tattvādhvan).

10)

The Division of the Principles' (tattvabhedanam).

12)
13)

The Application of the Path (ādhvopayoga).
The Descents of the Power (śaktipāta) and Obscuration
(šaktipātatirohitī).
The Preamble to the Rite of Initiation (dīkṣopakramaṇa).
The Common Initiation into the Rule (samayadīkṣā).

11)

14)
15)

16)
17)

18)

19)

The Path of the Forces and the Rest"”” (kalādyadhvan).

The Initiation of the Apprentice (pautrika).™
What needs be Done"" in the Procedure concerning the Apprentice
(vidheyaprakriyā vidhau).

The Brief Initiation (sīkṣmā dīkṣā).

The

lInitiation

of

the

Immediate

(sadyahsamutkrama).
20)
The Initiation of the Scales' (tulādīkṣā).
21)

22)

Exit

(from

the

Body)

The Initiation of those Absent (pārokṣī).

The Extraction of Śectarian Signs (iiṅgoddhara).”

' In this context the forms of consciousness are those corresponding to the means of

realisation.

' This chapter teaches how the cycles of time correspond to the cycle of the breath. By

attending to the breathing cycle with this awareness, the yogi practicing in āṇavopāya

absorbs the thought constructs which are the basis of the sense of time passing.

Ultimately, when the process is complete, he realises his own eternal conscious nature,

which is free of time.
'™ This chapter teaches how cycles — ‘wheels’ of repetitions of Mantras of various
lengths ‘arise’ in consonance with the cycle of the breath.

'U n this chapter, Abhinava presents a detailed description of the worlds (bhuvana)

that make up the cosmic order.
'” In the previous chapter, Abhinava described the nature of the thirty-six principles
(tattva); in this one, he teaches how a series of seven perceivers correspond to them.
These range from the most fully conditioned (sakala) right up to Śiva, the supreme
perceiver.

” The Forces (kalā) are five spheres of energy in which the thirty-six principles are

contained.
' The ‘apprentice’ is the teacher's spiritual son, who is destined to become a teacher in
his turn.

” 1 tentativeḷly emend prameyaprakriyā, which makes no sense to me, to

vidheyaprakriyā.

' The belief is that Karma weighs down the body. So in order to check that the teacher

has successfully removed the disciple’s Karma by means of initiation, he weighs him.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


23)

The Consecration (of a Teacher) (abhiṣecana).

25)

The Offering to the Dead (śrāddhakḷrṛpti).

24)
26)
27)

28)

The Funerary Rites (antyeṣṭi).

A Description of the Remaining Observance (śeṣavṛttinirūpaṇa).
The Worship of the Liṅga (liṅgārcā).

The Many Kinds of Propitious Times (parvan),”” (the Offering of)
the
Sacred
Thread
and
other
Occasional
Rites

29)

(bahubhitparvapavitrādi nimittaja).
The Secret Observance (rahasyacaryā).

31)

The (Trika) Maṇḍala (maṇḍala).

30)
32)
33)
34)
35)
36)
37)

The Current of Mantras.'” (mantraugha).
The Procedure concerning Mudrās (mudrikāvidhi)."
The Gathering Together (of the Deities) (ekīkāra).

Entry into One’s Own Nature (svasvarūpapraveśa).
The Encounter of the Scriptures (śāstramelana).
An Account of the Transmission of the Scriptures (āyātikathana).
A
Description
of
the
Scripturess
to
be
Adopted
(Śśāstropādeyatvanirūpaṇ. (279cd-285) (278-284ab)

The preliminary enunciation is (simply) a presentation (of contents) by
naming (them briefly) in a general way (as chapter headings). The subsequent

'” The word ‘liigodhara’ literally means ‘the extraction of sectarian marks'. When a

person belonging to another tradition takes Saiva initiation, the teacher must first

remove his connection with it. This procedure may involve the removal of the sectarian
marks on the disciple’s body that indicate his past affiliation.

' In common astrological terms, a parvan (lit. node’ or ‘juncture’) is a special fixed
period of time when a special celestial conjunction occurs. These include the days of the

four changes of the moon, that is, the full moon and change to the new moon, the eighth

and fourteenth of each half-month, the day of the moon’s passing the node at its
opposition or conjunction, the moment of the sun’s entering a new sign, and any

particular time of the year such as an equinox a solstice. Such periods of time are
occasions for the performance of rites that are considered to be especially efficacious. In

this chapter, Abhinava presents special Tantric parvans that are special days for the

worship, for example, of the eight Mothers. Others include the birthdays and death
anniversaries of teachers or when they come to visit. The etymology proposed by
Abhinavagupta for the word parvan is to derive it from the root pr, to fill (see below

above, 25/11cd-12ab and below, 28/14cd-18ab). Although it is purely a didactic one, it
indicates how he understood these special occasions periods to be. Accordingly,
following Gnoli’s lead, I translate parvan, as ‘a time of fulfilment’.

'™ In this chapter, Abhinava presents the Mantras required to perform the Trika rituals

taught in the Tantrāloka.
' Khecarī Mudrā (the Gesture of the Skyfarer) is the main Mudrā that gives energy to

the others described in this chapter. It is essentially the upward flight of Kuṇḍalinī
through the subtle body and out along its axis, which may be outlined by Śiva’s Trident

projected into it.
' The word ekīkāra literally means ‘making one’ and so, by extension, ‘gathering

togetherʼ, or ‘assemblingʼ. This chapter is dedicated to listing the names of the deities
that are the members of the enclosing assemblies (cakra) that, according to the
scriptures, surround the central Trika deities of the Trika Trident.

TANTRĀLOKA

enunciation is a presentation (of contents) by naming the particular (subsections
of each chapter). This same division (into two types of enunciation) has been
described elsewhere. There (in that context), he declares the preliminary
enunciation beginning with ‘the Various Forms of Consciousness’ and ending
with

exposition . . .ʼ. The ‘forms of consciousnessʼ are divided up into those
pertaining to Śiva (śāmbhava) and the rest. ‘Devoid of Means’ means No

Means (anupāya). ‘The Initiation of Apprentices (putraka) is in relation to
3,

the procedure prescribed for (the initiation of) apprentices (who are going to
become teachers). (The word) ‘i
onʼ is related to what was stated
previously (and has been brought forward to refer to the procedure for
apprentices). ‘Rituals’ should be associated with the procedure prescribed for
apprentices. As he will say:
‘(This is) explained in the subsequent enunciation of that chapter

concerning the procedure prescribed for apprentices.’'

What is the purpose of writing such (an extensive) book? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

fṝṀ a: qēḷ q |

qicg ā-rfāraāī aāāāaT aiq |

II

gaī īaaī-g: 1M 2¢. 1
iti saptādhikām enāṁ triṁśataṁ yaḥ ṣadā budhaḥ |

āhnikānāṁ samabhyasyet sa sākṣād bhairavo bhavet || 286 ||

saptatriṁśatsu sampūrṇabodho yad bhairavo bhavet |
kiṁ citram aṇavo ʻpy asya dṛśā bhairavatām iyuḥ || 287 I|

Thus, the wise man who constantly (and assiduously) practices
these thirty-seven chapters becomes Bhairava Himself in person (directly
visible) (sākṣā).™ He whose awakened understanding of the thirty-seven
(chapters) is perfectly complete (and His perfectly full consciousness

(pervades) within the thirty-seven (principles)) is Bhairava, what wonder

is it if by his (mere) glance, individual souls (also) attain Bhairava’s state?
(286-287) (284cd-286ab)
'} have not been able to trace this statement in the Tantrāloka or its commentary.

' This and the following verse are quoted below in TĀv ad 13/160 and 37/32-33ab.

Cf. below, 13/160, where Abhinava promises that a person who studies and practices the

teachings in the Tantrāloka becomes a true teacher. Thus, he is Bhairava in person —

sākṣāt — which means he is Bhairava who can be seen directly.

' The first line of this verse has two meanings. The immediate sense is the one that

follows from the previous verse. The suggested sense is that of the translation of the
same line in brackets.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

Detailed Enunciation of the Topics of the Tantrāloka

ṢNT ṬSITR:

[eeEte i|ēṭTCĀSHEKIECFZḺHHĪĪEPÁĀI

āṝīā 7Ṭ̄gaTa-q || 380 ||

rāāīd sT̄aīç aāīcāaq 1| 282 11

3qfzeaqīṁ JTITdddTaTTĀJaTĀT |II 282 1I

3--NR: TGTTT-.TTTTTTGAII|

TIINITTGṜTTSĒT-TĀṬṬRTHTCTT |

TTTQ |

ÑJGGTTTĪSTT I| 284 1I

TGJRÑNTTTCY

ity eṣa pūrvajoddeśaḥ kathyate tv anujo ‘dhunā |
1) vijñānabhitprakaraṇe sarvasyoddeśanaṁ kramāt || 288 ||
2) dviṭīyasmin prakaraṇe gatopāyatvabheditā |

3) viśvacitpratibimbatvaṁ parāmarśodayakramaḥ |) 289 ||

mantrādyabhinnarūpatvaṁ paropāye vivicyate |
4) vikalpasaṅskriyā tarkatattvaṁ guruṣatattvakam || 290 ||
yogāṅgānupayogitvaṁ kalpitārcādyanādaraḥ |
saṁviccakrodayo mantravīryajapyādi vāstavam || 291 ||
niṣedhavidhitulyatvaṁ śāktopāye ‘tra carcyate |

5) buddhidhyānaṁ prāṇatattvasamuccāraś cidātmanā || 292 ||

uccāraḥ paratattvāntaḥpraveśapathalakṣaṇam |
karaṇaṁ varṇatattvaṁ cety āṇave tu nirūpyate || 293 ||
6) cāramānamahorātrasaṁkrāntyādivikalpanam |
saṁhāracitratã varṇodayaḥ kālādhvakalpane || 294 ||
7) cakrabhinmantravidyābhidetaccakrodaye bhavet |
8) parimāṇaṁ purāṇāṁ ca saṁgrahastattvayojanam || 295 |I
etaddeśādhvanirdeśe 9) dvayaṁ tattvādhvanirṇaye |
kāryakāraṇabhāvaśca tattvakramanirūpaṇam || 296 ||

TANTRĀLOKA

This is the preliminary enunciation (of the topics discussed in the

Tantrāloka). Now we turn to the subsequent (detailed one). (289ab)
1)
2)
3)

AII (the topics discussed in the Tantrāloka) are (implicitly) indicated
in due order in the (first) chapter, which deals with the various
forms of consciousness (corresponding to the means to realisation).
The kind of (penetration into ultimate reality which is) devoid of

means is (discussed) in the second chapter.

(The topics) discussed in (the third chapter, that) deals with the

Supreme Means, are a) the reflection of all things within

consciousness, b) the sequence of the arising of (the fifty forms) of

reflective awareness,™° and c) the oneness (of these forms of

reflective

4)

awareness)

with

Mantra

and

the

other

(ritual

procedures).
Here (in chapter four, that) deals with the Empowered Means, (the

following topics) are discussed: a) the purification of thought, b)

the true nature of discriminative reasoning (larka), c) nature and
characteristics of teachers, d) the inapplicability of the auxiliaries of
yoga (apart from sound discriminative reasoning), e) the
irrelevance of conceived forms of worship etc., f) the arising of the

cycles of Consciousness,™ g) the vitality of Mantra,' h) the true

repetition of Mantra (japya) and the rest (of the constituents of

ritual), i) the equivalence of prohibitions and injunctions.
12ss This is the flow

as pure ‘]’ consciousness, represented by the letters of the alphabet.

' The ‘purification’, that is, progressive elimination, of thought constructs leading to

the direct recognition of one’s own Śiva nature free of thought constructs, is the practice

of the Empowered Means. Accordingly, Abhinava begins his exposition of this means
by describing the stages in which it takes place and how it does s0.
' The most excellent Wheel or Cycle of Consciousness is that of the Twelve Kālīs,

which is described here. The Twelve Kālīs correspond to twelve phases in the
cycle of
perception. These are the four phases of the arising, persistence, withdrawal, and
the

fourth encompassing state of unity, in the domain of the object, means of knowledge
and the perceiver. Although the recognition of this cycle is the culminating experience
of all three means to realisation, Abhinava describes it in this

apter concerning the

Empowered Means, as it primarily marks the phases of elimination of thought
constructs in the three domains of subject, object and means of knowledge. When this
process is complete, the liberated soul recognizes that he is the oneness which is Śiva,

and that the whole universe (of duality) is an emanation of the Light of his own

consciousness. Thus, he realises unity-in-diversity (bhedābheda) and enters the pure
oneness of the Absolute ~ Anuttara — beyond means (anupāya).

' The vitality (vārya) of Mantra is the universal pulsation (sāmānyaspanda) of the pure

‘T of Śiva consciousness, realised as the plenitude of the phases of consciousness

worshipped as the Twelve Kālīs, and so is discussed here.

' The prohibitions and injunctions taught in the scriptures are meant for the benefit of

people who practice in the lower means to realisation. However, in reality they

are just

notions, as is evidenced by the fact that they are relative to one another and vary
different contexts and according to differing traditions. Thus, they are equivalen

in

t and so

5)


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

(The following) are described (in Chapter Five, that deals with) the
Individual Means: a) meditation by means of the intellect, b) the

utterance through the principle of the vital breath, and c) the
utterance through the conscious nature,” d) entry into the
6)

Supreme Principle, e) the characteristic signs on the path, f) the
instruments (of yoga), and g) the true nature of the phonemes.
(Chapter Six deals with) the conception (kalpana) of the Path of
Time. (The topics discussed here are:) a) the measure of the
movement (of the vital breath), b) the conception of night and day
and the transits (of the sun through the zodiac) and so on, c) the
various kinds of reabsorptions (of the breath into consciousness),
and d) the (progressive) arising of the (energies of the) phonemes

(in the cycle of the breath).
7)

8)

9)

(This chapter deals with the progressive) arising of the cycles

(cakrodaya) (of the syllables of Mantras in the movement of the
breath) and the various types of cycles, Mantras and Vidyās.

In (the chapter that) teaches the Path of Space, (we discuss) the

dimensions of the worlds, a summary of the worlds, and their
association with the metaphysical principles.
The two (topics discussed in the chapter) dealing with the Path of
the Principles, are a) the relationship between cause and effect, and

b) a description of the sequence of the principles. (288-296) (286cd295ab)

iG{EEIŠIFIĒĒĒEĪPTISĒTEUVIĀ
JHTĀG 3—Tq ṁā.rz fē-TĀ 11 3<% 1
TJTATRTTGTĪTTZTEITTIĒTT] |
qtũīazī. gdT¥aũthṝrēTTḤ II 2X¢ 11

SṬRATĪGTTĪ-RTRṬHĪ TTĀĪTĀTḤ II|/3<8 1I

JITrāTāTārāTaāTTaTaT-TRTHTa: |

m- ofgdaāī 1| 23¢ 1

not relevant for those who are practicing the purification and elimination of thought
constructs in the Empowered Means.

' Read cidātmanā for cidātmatā.

'! The word cakra literally means ‘wheelʼ. In this context, as in many others, it means

‘cycle’. In this chapter, Abhinava examines the number of times Mantras of varying
lengths can be repeated in consonance with the cyclic movement of the breath in the

course of twenty-four hours. The various ‘Wheels’ are these cycles of varying length
and number according to the length of the particular Mantra recited in this way.

TANTRĀḶOKA

10) vastudharmas tattvavidhir jāgradādinirāpaṇam |
pramātr̥bheda ity etat tattvabhede vicāryate || 297 ||

11) kalāsvarūpam ekatripañcādyais tattvakalpanam |
varṇabhedakramaḥ sarvādhāraśaktinirūpaṇam || 298 I
kalādyadhvavicārāntare tāvat pravivicyate |
12) abhedabhāvanākampahrāsau tv adhvopayojane || 299 ||
13) saṅkhyādhikyaṁ malādīnāṁ tattvaṁ śaktivicitratā |

anapekṣitvasiddhiś ca tirobhāvaviciṭratā || 300 ||
šaktipātaparīkṣāyām etāvān vācyasaṁgrahaḥ |

14) tirobhāvavyapagamo jñānena paripūrṇatā || 301 ||

utkrāntyanupayogitvaṁ dīkṣopakramaṇe sthitam |
10)

In the (chapter concerning) the various ways the principles are

divided (into groups, the following topics are discussed): a)
(perceptibility as) a property of entities (vastudharma),” b) the

procedure pertaining to the principles (with regards to the seven

levels of perceivers), c) a description of the waking and other states

11)

(of consciousness in relation to them), d) the various types of
experiencing subjects.

In (this chapter dealing with) the Path of the Forces etc., (the

following) are discussed: a) the nature of the forces, b) the
conception (of the division of all things) into one, three and five etc.

principles,'” c) the process of the differentiation of the phonemes

12)

(in relation to these divisions), and d) a description of the power
that sustains everything.

(The topics discussed in this chapter that deals) with the application

of the Path (described in the previous chapters) are: a) the

contemplation of nonduality (abhedabhāvanā) and b) the reduction

13)

of doubt (kampahrāṣa).
a) The superiority (of Śaivism with respect to) Sāṁkhya etc., b) the
nature of impurity (mala) etc., c) the variety of (the descents of)
power, d) proof of their independence (from personal effort), and e)
the variety of forms of obscuration. Such, in brief, are the matters
discussed (in Chapter Thirteen, which is) concerned with the

' In this secton Abhinava discusses the nature of phenomena and the perceiver. He

discusses whether the objects the perceiver perceives exist independently of the
perceiver and perception, or not. In this way he introduces his exposition of the seven
levels of perceivers arranged along the hierarchy of the thirty-six principles and
corresponding objects.

' At the lowest level, seven levels of perceivers span the thirty-six principles. They

each have their objective sphere, thus making fourteen. Their own essential nature

(svarūpa) is the fifteenth. Proceeding upwards to the next higher perceiver, the units
decrease by two. Finally, at the top, only their essential nature remains, which is Śiva
who is perceived directly as the consciousness beyond subject and object. Thus, in

descent the units increase from one to three, then five and so on up to fifteen.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

examination of the (forms of) the descent of the power (of grace)

14)

(Śaktipāta).

(This chapter deals with) the preamble to the rite of initiation. (The

topics there) are: a) the removal of obscuration, b) fulfilment by

knowledge and c) the futility of (ritual) suicide. (297-302ab) (295cd-

300)

TTHIRTIṬTĀGIJĪT ĪTGTĀTSTT] |
R̥ATTTTTT=I
] āṬTT+ BHTIT 1|| 303 1|

ÉEkīḻBtēzztavltar|Exr-ḤḤ

frīṁzaṟaāferz afrrṃṛṀtī=ṝīa 1| 30v 1|

šTST yīgfafraTā-TTST |
STRTNTGTTĪTFT
: ṬT TAĀ TāĪ;: ||/304 1|
raT-ī āgāhīã aTaraTG-RTīTTḤ || 30ē 1|
ftraezāfatkrzaīmī vraṁāftaferzmoq_ 1| 30.5 1

# |

rfēā 1| 30c 1

15) siṣyaucityaparīkṣādau snānabhit™ sthāṇakalpanam || 302 ||

sāmānyanyāsabhedo ‘rghapātraṁ caitat prayojanam |

dravyayogyatvam arcā ca bahirdvārārcanaṁ kramāt || 303 ||

praveśo dikṣyarūpaṁ ca dehaprāṇādiśodhanam |
viśeṣanyāsavaicitryaṁ saviśeṣārghabhājanam || 304 ||
dehapūjā prāṇabuddhicitkhādhvaṅyāsapūjane |
anyaśāstragaṇotkarṣaḥ pūjā cakrasya sarvataḥ || 305 II
kṣetragrahaḥ pañcagavyaṁ pūjanaṁ bhūgaṇeśayoḥ |
astrārcā vahnikāryaṁ cāpy adhivāsanam agnigam || 306 ||
tarpaṇaṁ carusaṁsiddhir dantakāṣṭhāntasaṁskriyā |

Śivahasṭavidhiś cāpi śayyāklṛpti vicāraṇam || 307 ||
svapnasya sāmayaṁ karma samayāś ceti saṁgrahaḥ |
samayitvavidhāv asmin syāt pañcadaśa āhnike || 308 |I
15)


CHAPTER FIFTEEN DEALS WITH THE (BASIC) COMMON INITIATION. THE
--------------------------------------------------

topics discussed here are, in brief: a) the examination of the
disciple’s competence (to receive initiation), b) the various types of
(riṭual) bath, c) the selection of the place (suitable for the sacrifice)

'√Read snānabhit for sthānabhit.

TANTRĀLOKA

(sthānakalpana), d) the kinds of common depositions (on the body),
e) the sacrificial jar and its purpose, f) the appropriateness of the
sacrificial substances, g) the outer sacrifice and the worship of the
door, h) entry (into the abode of the sacrifice), i) the nature of the
directions, j) the purification of the body and the vital breath etc.,
k) the variety of special depositions (on the body), 1) the worship of

the body, m) the special rite for the sacrificial vessel, n) worship
and deposition of the path in the vital breath, intellect, mind and

the Void,° 0) the superiority (of our school) over those of other

scriptures, p) the worship of the Wheel in all respects, q) taking
possession of the field, r) the five products of the cow, s) the worship
of the earth and Gaṇeśa, t) the worship of the Weapon, u) the fire
sacrifice, v) the purification of the fire, w) the libation, x) the
preparation of the sacrificial pap (caru), y) the stick for the teeth, z)
the final purification, a2) the rite of Śiva’s hand, b2) the making of
the bed, c2) the examination of dreams, d2) the rite (during which
the initiate is taught) the Rules, and e2) the Rules (themselves).
(302cd-308) (301-307ab)

Ejṭe
EIEIPHĀNIEENIEGaTEIEEIf

16) maṇḍalātmānusandhānaṁ nivedyapaśuviṣtaraḥ |
agnitṛptiḥ svasvabhāvadīpanaṁ Śiṣyadehagaḥ || 309 ||
adhvanyāṣavidhiḥ śodhyaśodhakādivicitratā |
dīkṣābhedaḥ paro nyāso mantrasattāprayojanam || 310 ||
bhedo yojanikādeś ca ṣoḍaśe syād ihāhnike |

16)

Here in Chapter Sixteen will come (the following topics): a) the

unifying contemplation of the constituents of the maṇḍala, b)
(matters)

concerning

the

animals

fit

to

be

offered,

c)

the

propitiation of the fire, d) the inflaming of (the teacher’s) own

essential nature, e) the procedure for the deposition of a Path on the

disciple’s body, f) the variety of Paths to be purified and their

' Read citkhādhva- for citsvadhva-. See 15/295cd ff.

' Concerning the term anusaṁdhāna as meaning both ‘conjunction’ or ‘fusion’ and

‘contemplation’, see above note 1,1072. The expression maṇḍalātmānusaṁdhānam
reminds one of Śivasūtra 1/6 — ‘śakticakrānusaṁdhāne viśvasaṁhāraḥ — ‘when
contemplating (and fusing together) the Wheel of Energies, the universe is withdrawn’
(see Dyczkowski 1992: 25). In this case, it is the constituent parts of the maṇḍala that
are conjoined together in the course of the ritual procedure, to be finally contemplated

as one with Śiva.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

purifiers etc., g) the various types of initiation, h) the supreme
deposition, i) the essential being and purpose of Mantra, h) the
various types of conjunction and so forth. (309-311ab) (307cd-309)

gāaāritīraāfs: TTNIaTGIS āISTTT |I/322 |I

ṁrard ũras faṣī 1
17) sūtrakḷṛptis tatvaśuddhiḥ pāśadāho ‘tha yojanam || 311 II
adhvabhedas tathety evaṁ kathitaṁ pautrike vidhau |
17)

The procedure pertaining to the apprentice (putraka) is explained in

this way: a) the fashioning of the sacred threads, b) the purification

of the principles, d) the burning of the fetters, e) the conjunction
(with the supreme principle) and f) the various paths. (311cd-

312ab)

StT-ITfTāTTc T-ITaTSJ JTRZ: || 322 1|

GṬGīdēīī] ITJĪTTATTRAṬ. JĀĪTT; || 323 1|

18) janaṇādivihīnatvaṁ mantrabhedo ‘tha susphuṭaḥ || 312 ||
iti saṁkṣiptadīkṣākhye syād aṣṭādaśa āhnike |
19) kālāvekṣā kṛpāṇyādinyāsaś cāraḥ śarīragaḥ || 313 ||
brahmavidyāvidhiś caivam uktaṁ sadyaḥsamutkrame |
18)

Now a) the absence of (further) births etc. and b) the various types

19)

In (this chapter, which teaches the initiation) of immediate exit
(from the body), is taught a) the ascertainment of impending

of Mantra will be (discussed) very clearly in eighteenth chapter,
which is called the ‘brief initiation’.

death,” b) the deposition of the razor and the rest (in the dying
man’s body), c) the circulation of (the breath in his) body and d) the
procedure for the Brahmavidyā (that liberates him). (312cd-314ab)
(311-312)

TTR-RTTRTTTqTPHYSJ ṬPIĪĀĪḤ: ||/32:

HRtTHIEETCZIIĒAIṭIAṈI

rā̃sīatzfktēsrrdcāṁ: afgēarr̥ṝ ] 32. 1|

TANTRĀLOKA

EEKĒEIPĒTVĒAĒṄIT-AIĒT

JIāī] āīāgaāT dīīīak=zfa: || 32ē 1|
20) adhikāraparīkṣāṇtaḥsaṁskāro ʻtha tulāvidhiḥ || 314 ||
ity etad vācyasarvasvaṁ syād viṁśatitamāhnike |
21) mṛtajīvadvidhir jālopadeśaḥ saṁṣkriyāgaṇe || 315 1|
balābalavicāraś cety ekaviṁśāhnike vidhiḥ |
22) śrāvaṇaṁ cābhyanujñānaṁ śodhanaṁ pātakacyutiḥ ||
Śaṅkāccheda iti spaṣṭaṁ vācyaṁ liṅgoddhr̥tikrame |
20)
21)

316 1|

Now this is the essence of what is to be stated in Chapter Twenty: a)
the inner purification, b) the examination (of the attainment) of

authority and c) the procedure of the scales.

The procedure (taught) in Chapter Twenty-One deals (includes) a)

the procedure concerning (those who are absent, whether) dead or
alive, b) the teaching of the net, c) the examination of the strength

22)

and weakness of the group of purifications.'”

In (this chapter, which is concerned with) the rite of extracting

sectarian signs (from one who is converting to Śaivism), is found a

clear exposition (vācya) of a) the proclamation' (to the Lord) and

(His) consent (to impart conversion), b) purification and liberation
from sin, and c) the elimination of doubt. (314cd-317ab) (313-315)

TḡT =TT Td: II 32%9 ||

TTTHIS-KATIR
ārheā TRTTTT |
23) parīkṣācāryakaraṇaṁ tadvrataṁ haraṇaṁ mateḥ || 317 I|
tadvibhāgaḥ sādhakatvam abhiṣekavidhau tv iyat|
24) adhikāry atha saṁskāras tatprayojanam ity adaḥ || 318 II
taturviṁśe ‘ntyayāgākhye vaktavyaṁ paricarcyate |
23)

In (Chapter Twenty-Three, which) deals with the consecration (of
the teacher), is found a) the examination and creation of a teacher,
b) his Mantra observance, c) the removal of knowledge (from a

deceitful disciple), d) the categories of those (deceitful teachers) and
e) the (consecration into) the state of an adept.

' Iṇitiation imparts ‘authority° or ‘aptitude’ to practice and achieve the goal of that

practice. Thus, the examination of the outer signs of having attained it is essentially the

ascertainment that the initiation has been imparted and received.

'” Read saṁskriyāgaṇe for saṁskriyāgaṇaḥ, as Gnoli suggests.

' Read śrāvaṇaṁ for śravaṇaṁ.

24)


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


Now, in Chapter Twenty-Four, called ‘the last sacrificial rite’
(antyayāga), is discussed what should be taught there, namely: a)
the recipient (adhikārin), b) the rite of passage (saṁṣkāraḥ) and c)

its purpose. (317cd-319ab) (316-317)

āīṝṁ ũrṁaardá -ṁfat: #ēa: 1| 32x1|

25) prayojanaṁ bhogamokṣadānaṁ nāḍīvidhiḥ" sphuṟaḥ 1| 319 1

pañcaviṁśāhnike śrāddhaprakāśe vastusaṁgrahaḥ |
26) prayojanaṁ śeṣavṛtter nityārcā sthaṇḍile parā || 320 ||
27) liṅgasvarūpaṁ bahudhā cākṣasūtranirūpaṇam |
pūjābheda iti vācyaṁ liṅgārcāsamprakāśane || 321 ||
25)

In Chapter Twenty-Five, which is (called) ‘the exposition of the

26)

c) the bestowal of worldly benefits (bhoga) and liberation.
(The topics of Chapter Twenty-Six) are: a) the purpose of the rites
performed after initiation, b) the regular worship (nityārcā) on the

27)

offering to the dead (śrāddha)’, the subjects in brief are: a) (its)
purpose, b) a clear procedure for the channels (of the breath), and

sacrificial surface.

In Chapter (Twenty-Seven,) which is (called) ‘the exposition of the
worship of the Liṅga’, (the topics) to be discussed are: a) the many

kinds of Liṅga, b) a description of (the varieties of) rosaries, and c)

the various forms of worship. (319cd-321) (318-320ab)

iīaāōexctcIEEiihzxxTH
TJÑÑRṬTHTTR̥TIJĒTTĪT
TGTT |I 3221
JāTāT-āTaTāṝTJĪTSTrTTT] |

Ja: ṀŪtaāī ārtrcīṁahiterattzēaṁ ú| 3231
eiE=ieEPHRIGĒVAVSIĒĒĒIĪĒCCGI

fē--] 11 32x 1|
28) naimittikavibhāgas tatprayojanavidhis tataḥ |
parvabhedās tadviśeṣaś cakracarcā tadarcanam || 322 |
gurvādyantadinādyarcāprayojananirūpaṇam |
mṛteḥ parīkṣā yogīśīmelakādividhis tathā || 323 I|

' Read -dānaṁ nāḍīvidhiḥ for -dāne nātra vidhiḥ.

TANTRĀLOKA

vyākhyāvidhiḥ cyutavidhir gurupūjāvidhis tv iyat |
naimittikaprakāśākhye ‘py aṣṭāviṁśāhnike sthitam || 324 ||

28)

In Chapter Twenty-Eight, which is called ‘the exposition of the
occasional rites’ (naimittikaprakāśa), (the matters discussed include)

a) the kinds of occasional events (naimittika), b) the injunction

concerning their application, c) the various propitious times

(parvan) and d) their special features, e) an examination (of the
Sacrifice) of the assembly (cakra) and f) its worship. (Other topics

include): g) a description of the purpose of the worship of the

teacher’s birthday, the day he died and the like, h) an examination
of death, h) the procedure concerning the gathering (melaka) of
Yoginīs (yogīsī) etc., i) the procedure for the explanation (of the
scriptures), j) procedure for (the expiation of) transgressions (of the

Rule), and k) the procedure for the worship of the teacher. (322-

324) (320cd-323ab)

tīa; fṇzūcīzgea-: |
rdīatrratasī azāīdṝrcṣa 1| 324 1
GJÑŪEGAEEPTCEAEēHḤ]

adhikāryātmaṇo bhedaḥ siddhapatnīkulakramaḥ !
arcāvidhir dautavidhī rahasyopaniṣatkramaḥ || 325 |
dīkṣābhiṣekau vedhaś cety ekonatriṁśa āhnike |

29)

(The matters discussed) in the twenty-ninth chapter are: a) those

who are fit (to perform Kaula rites), b) the Kula rite (kulakrama)
dedicated to the Siddhas and (their) consorts, c) the procedure for
the rite of worship (according to Mādhvakula), d) the procedure
concerning the Tantric consort, e) the liturgy of the secret doctrine,
f) initiation, g) consecration (of the adept and teacher), and h) the
(initiation by) piercing (the inner centres). (325-326ab) (323cd-

324)

ṃ-rāx% zrrṁṝr frst rsttrq 1 32= 1

JJGTSSTÑ] -āTTaṬāāīēf̄TēTTTR |
[EEEUIEEISE ĒIFEAFRĪ]r--JṬṚEICṈ

TTṀ TĨĪTHJ |
hōīīṀ f] ũīTṁ JRGTTIi GSSTNIT || 32¢ ||
30) mantrasvarūpaṁ tadvīryam iti triṁśe nirāpitam || 326 ||
1i02 Read cyuta- for śruta-.

'" Read vedhas for bodhaś.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


31) śūlābjabhedo vyomeśasvastikādinirūpaṇam |
vistareṇābhidhātavyam ity ekatriṁśa āhnike || 327 ||
32) guṇapradhānatābhedāḥ svarūpaṁ vīryacarcanam |
kalābheda iti proktaṁ mudrāṇāṁ samprakāśane || 328 II
30)

The nature of the Mantras and their vitality (vīrya) are described in

31)


CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE (WAS WRITTEN) TO FULFIL THE NEED FOR A DETAILED
--------------------------------------------------


32)


CHAPTER THĪRTY.
--------------------------------------------------


exposition of the various types (of Trika maṇḍala) with lotuses and
tridents, and a description (of the parts of the other maṇḍalas

called) the ‘Lord of the Sky’, the Svastika and the rest.
(Chapter Thirty-Two) deals with the Mudrās. The topics discussed
(there) are a) (their) secondary and primary types, b) their nature,
c) deliberation on (the nature of their) vitality (vīrya), and d) the

various occasions (when they are applied). (326cd-328) (325327ab)
(The word) ‘thus’ (iti) (with which verse 284 begins and so marks the

beginning of this entire section) does not just (imply) in this way that the
greatness of this (book consists) only (in the contents that are briefly enunciated
as the headings of each chapter), but in something else also, which is stated (in
the passage) beginning with ‘these thirty-seven chapters’ and ending with
‘(chapter thirty-two) deals with’ (i.e. the subsections of each chapter). Here
(in this book), the author has, in accord with (the nature of) reality (which

consists of thirty-seven principles), written thirty-seven chapters as a (single)
whole (when read together as a book) and individually (when read as individual

chapters). Just as everything that is present within the Earth principle is in a

gross form because it is predominantly based on duality, similarly, here also
(all) that will be discussed is declared (in this, the first chapter, with the words)
‘all (the topics discussed in the Tantrāloka) are announced in due order (in

the (first) chapter)ʼ.' ‘The Supreme Means’ is the Means pertaining to Śiva
(śāmbhavopāya). 1) 1t is generally said that (the nature) of this (means) is

'M Read kālabheda for kalābheda.

'M We shall see further ahead in Chapter Nine that reality is understood to be the

undivided oneness of the thirty-seven metaphysical principles (tattva) as the one
universal and transcendental consciousness. The principles are links in a causal chain,
formed in such a way that the higher principles contain within themselves the lower
ones in a potential form and contain the ones above as the actualization of their
potential. Thus, a complete knowledge of any one of them is the knowledge of all of
them. In other words, consciousness, the one reality, unfolds in such a way that the
nature of each phase ofits expansion contains all the others,in accord with the holistic
motto of Trika Śaivism formulated by Śambhunātha, Abhinavagupta’s Trika master,

namely, sarvaṁ sarvātmakam — ‘the nature of every (single thing) is everything’ (see

PTy p. 165 ff.). Jayaratha is telling us here that Abhinava has written his Tantrāloka in

the same way. A complete understanding of any one chapter (or, indeed of any part of
it) is the same as a complete understanding of all of it. Jayaratha goes on to cite the first
chapter, which corresponds to Earth, the lowest principle, as an example.
' Above, 1/286cd (1/287ab).

TANTRĀLOKA

(nondiscursive) thought-free (consciousness), and that is possible when there is
no (perception of) duality, which (takes place) when the universe of words and
their meanings is (realized to be) the one (pure) consciousness. There (in that
context), the universe of (things) denoted by words is a reflection within
consciousness and, as such, is of two kinds, namely, universal (as
consciousness) and particular (as the reflections within it). 2, 3) Moreover, the
universe of words is (also) said to be one (as is that of their meanings), because

the Mantras etc. (from which the universe is generated) and the progressive
emergence of the forms of reflective awareness (that correspond to the letters
from which they are constructed) are (both an) undivided (unity), because they

are not separate from consciousness."” These are the three things to be known

(by this, the Supreme Means,) included here (in Chapter Three, which is

dedicated to it).

Again, the nature of the Empowered (Means) is the transformation (of
thought constructs) (vikalpaka). Thus, 1) the purification of thought is the first
thing that is discussed (in the beginning of Chapter Four, which is dedicated to
this Means. There) it is explained (how this takes place) through (sound
discriminative) reasoning by reflecting on, for example, (the true nature of)
what should be avoided (and what should be adopted in order to realise the
reality of consciousness, which is free of such conceived distinctions). 2) Thus

(an exposition of the) nature of that (sound discriminative reasoning) follows

after that. 3) Moreover, one acquires a true teacher by virtue of the radiant

brilliance (visphūrjita) of (sound discriminative) reasoning, which is essentially

Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyā). 4) Thus he explains that, along with its true

nature. 5) (Sound discriminative) reasoning (in this sense) is a direct and clearly
apparent auxiliary (aṅga)' of Yoga, and so the other auxiliaries of Yoga are of

no use. 6) Moreover, as (sound discriminative) reasoning (tarka)' is

'"7 ‘Bothī’ may also be the universe of words and the things they denote. These two are
both one with nondiscursive pure consciousness, and so as they are two aspects of it;
they are essentially one with one another.
'N We have seen that these three topics discussed in Chapter Three, that deals with the

Supreme Means, are a) the reflection of all things within consciousness, b) the sequence
of the arīsing of (the fifty forms) of reflective awareness (that flow as pure ‘Tʼconsciousness represented by the letters of the alphabet), and c) the oneness (of these

forms of reflective awareness) with Mantra and the rest.

" Ṣee below, 4/11 Icd ff.

'1 Ṣee above, note 1,184.
! The term ‘tarka’ literally means ‘reasoning’, ‘speculation’, ‘inquiry, ‘logic’ʼ, or

‘confutation’. It is a common word for ‘logic’, and as such denotes both the discipline of
logic and the Nyāya school of Indian philosophy, which supports what one could call
the everyday ‘common sense’ understanding of the nature of reality. To do this, it
developed an elaborate system of logic and formalized the principles of philosophical

debate, and so is also sometimes called ‘tarkaśāstra’. The sense of ‘tarka’ in the

Mālinīvijayottara, from which Abhinavagupta draws the term, is the discriminating
discernment between what is to be adopted (upādeya) and what should be rejected
(heyādyālocanā) (MV 17/18). Thus, as Abhinava explains it, it is a kind of reasoning
insofar as it involves the operation and use of notions (vikalpa) that are exclusive of one
another to form assessments. However, it differs also if understood as Pure Knowledge,
which does not involve ratiocination, but is, on the contrary, an intuitive direct insight


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


essentially Pure Knowledge, and so because it counters Māyā’s dualiṣṭic
thought constructs, ritual worship and the like, which is conceptual, is not taken
into consideration (when practicing the Empowered Means). 7) Thus, the Cycle
of Consciousness (saṁviccakra) (of the Twelve Kālīs) dawns by virtue of the

stability of the purification of thought." 8) That dawning (of the cycle of the
Twelve Kālīs) is the supreme vitality of Mantras, and the reflective awareness

(that operates) in this way is the true repetition of Mantra and (all) other (ritual
procedures). 9) Thus, because there is no duality in consciousness, prohibitions

and injunctions are equal (and both useless). In this way, (the fourth chapter,

which deals with the Empowered Means,) contains nine things to be known (by

means of the Empowered Means).
In the same way, the (practice of) meditation by means of the intellect

(buddhidhyāna)' and the rest, which belong to the Individual Means, also

serve directly as a means to that (Empowered Means). We have not explained
every word, because (much) is clear (as it is) and for fear of making the book

too long, and also because (much) will be explained further ahead. Thus, one
should understand it for oneself.
ŚSurely (one may ask,) why has the subsequent (detailed) enunciation of
the chapters from (thirty-three), which deals with the assembly (of deities), not
been made? With this question in mind, he says:

flEASIEIGĀIT=Ie’ĒIĀTTAĪ. Ā

ā I| 33281|
dvātriṁśatattvād īśākhyāt prabhṛti prasphuṭo yataḥ |
into the nature of reality, that is free of thought constructs. But we should not

understand what is meant by ‘tarka’ as just insight, intuitive knowledge, as opposed to

the dry logic of ‘tarka’, the former free of thought constructs and the latter quite the
opposite. ‘Right or sound reasoning’ — sattarka mediates between the two — thought and
the consciousness beyond it, which knows itself both as the transcendental perceiver
who is all things and immanently as all things of which it is the true nature. One could
say, in a way, that it is a ‘thoughtless thought’. It is ‘thoughtless” because it is the

insight consciousness has of itself as reality, which knows itself not just abstractly

beyond all conceptual representation, but also concretely in every tiny detail of all that

exists. Itis ‘thought’ because insight issues into thought as the teachings and from them,

by profound insight into their meaning, which ultimately transcends it. In other words, it
is both the destination and the way to it. Accordingly, it is not wrong to retain, in part at

least, the literal meaning of the word sattarka by translating as it as ‘sound

discriminative intuitive reasoning°.

'. Read eva vikalpasaṅṣkārasya for evāvikalpasaṁskārasya. If we do not make this

emendation, the meaning is ‘the stability of the latent trace (of consciousness) free of

thought’. But this makes little sense, as it is thought that leaves behind latent traces. The
other sense of ‘purification’ would also not apply to the thought-free condition, which is
that of ‘pure’ consciousness. The Dawning of the Cycle of Consciousness within the

expanse of individual consciousness completes the process begun by Sound Reasoning,

by removing the last traces of doubts from which dualistic thought constructs germinate.
See below, 4/122cd ff. more specifically 4/148 ff.

'1 See below, 5/19cd-42.

TANTRĀLOKA

na bhedo ‘ṣṭi tato noktam uddeśāntaram atra tat || 329 ||
The reason why there is no other enunciation here of (the contents
of the Tantrāloka) is stated (beyond chapter thirty-two) is because, from the

thirty-second principle, that is, the one called Īśa,onwards, there is no

clearly apparent division (bheda). (329) (327cd-328ab)

The chapter concerning Gesture (mudrā) is the one that has as its

essential nature the thirty-second principle. After that, namely the thirty-second,
which is called Īśa, comes the thirty-third, which is the chapter (concerning the)
assembly (of deities). Starting from that (level) division (bheda) does not
predominate, and (so as there are no subdivisions into topics in the
corresponding chapters, and) no subsequent (detailed) enunciation is made. This
is the meaning.
Now if there is no differentiation (bheda) from there onwards, what was

the purpose of (even) enumerating the other (following) chapters? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

TGATĀĪ ] SJāTTTTTCTJITTHTH: |

mukhyatvena ca vedyatvād adhikārāntarakramaḥ |

The remaining series of chapters (adhikāra) (corresponding to the
inner sequence of competence within consciousness) (adhikārāntarakrama)
is due to the (subtle presence of) objectivity (at the higher reality levels) in

its primary (most generic, internal) form."° (330ab) (328cd)
Concluding this (topic), he introduces another one.

ity uddeśavidhiḥ proktaḥ sukhasaṁgrahahetave |
athāṣya lakṣaṇāvekṣe nirāpyete yathākramam || 330 |

See below, 9/50cd-53ab. This is Śuddha Vidyā, the first of the series of five pure

principles in which nonduality prevails.

There is enough differentiation (bheda) for there to be five metaphysical principles
and corresponding reality levels beyond the thirty-second, although oneness between
subjective consciousness and its objective contents prevails at these levels. Abhinava

explains that the objectivity present even at these levels is in its ‘primary form’ʼ, in the

sense that it is the experience that the subject has of itself as objectivity, which at its

highest level is the immanent aspect of transcendental subjectivity. It is primary because
it precedes and is the basis of outer objectivity, that is experienced as external and
independent of the subject.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

Such is the enunciation (uddeśa) (of the contents of the Tantrāloka),

expounded in order (to present) an easy summary (of it). Now (in what

follows), its definition and examination are presented in due order.
(330cdef)

‘Its’, that is, the topics that have (just been) enunciated.

Now he summarizes the teaching (artha) of (this) chapter.

The Concluding Verses

TāG&T: |

3TTTSĪTd TITTYRZTTHTRTI

ātmā saṁvitprakāśasthitiranavayavā saṁvidityāttaśaktivrātaṁ
tasya ṣvarūpaṁ sa ca nijamahasaśchādanād baddharūpaḥ |
ātmajyotiḥ svabhāvaprakaṭanavidhinā tasya mokṣaḥ sa cāyaṁ
citrākāraṣya citraḥ prakaṭita iha yat saṁgraheṇārtha eṣaḥ || 331 ||
The Self is the abiding state (sthiti) of the Light of consciousness. It

is (pure) consciousness without parts (or divisions) and so it encompasses

(the entire) multitude of powers. By concealing its own glory, (it assumes)
the bound form (of the fettered soul). Its liberation (comes about) by the
procedure (vidhi) that reveals the Light of the Self, which is its own
essential nature. The purport here (of the teachings) is this wonderfully
various (liberated state of the fettered soul, whose) form is (also) various
and is revealed herein succinctly (saṁgraheṇa) (by this collection of
teachings). (331)

Here (according to us), the essential nature of the Self is Light which,
different from the (common) external light of the three abodes (of Sun, Moon

and Fire), is consciousness alone. And consciousness is ‘without partsʼ. It is
just one, and its form is undivided (continuous) Light. And so, in accord with
the reason (yukti) stated previously, namely that ‘the power (śakti) (which is the
functional efficacy) of an entity is its own (specific) nature as conceived by the
subjects (who perceive it) (mātṛkalpita) (on the basis of its various effects),"
the essential nature (svarūpa) of that Self (atman) has encompassed (within

itself) endless powers. Although its nature is nondual in this way, it manifests
'! The first verse that follows defines the purport of the Tantrāloka and its contents.

The following further examines it.

'"T The variety of forms of liberation correspond, as we have seen (1/33), to the variety

of traditions that teach forms of liberation corresponding to the form or level of the

fettered soul.
'I Above, 1/68 (69).

TANTRĀLOKA

the duality which is subject and object by concealing ‘its own glory, that is,
(its own unique) cognitive subjectivity and agency that it does not share in
common with anything else, by (the power of) its own freedom, which does
what is extremely difficult to do. (Thus,) in accord with the aforestated reason,

namely, that ‘Śiva Himself has assumed the state of the fettered soulʼ,’ he is

said to be ‘boundʼ. Even so, by reversing (this condition) (pratyāvṛtti),
liberation is (achieved, which is) the unfolding experience (prathana) of one’s
own ‘glory, that is, (supreme) cognitive subjectivity and agency, in accord with
the aforestated view, namely:
‘Liberation is nothing but the (full and complete) experience (prathana)

of one’s own nature. And the nature of the Self is (pure) consciousness.

Moreover, as is the reality (they teach), such is the extent of the
multitude of each of the endless (collections of) scriptures (śāstra). He says this

(by stating) ‘and this’ etc. And this ‘liberation’, which is the penetration

pertaining to Śiva and the rest (of them), is ‘wonderfully various’ and is
‘revealed herein’, that is, in this chapter. (t is the liberated state of the fettered
soul, whose) nature is various according to the plane of the particular
philosophy taken up as the basis (of practice and insight,) in accord with the
aforestated view:
‘“I am unsullied by attachment and the like”, “I am inwardly empty”
and “ḹ am inactive” (only this manner of knowledge, whether, collectively or

individually, can liberate from that much (bondage).)


Or else its ‘form is various’ in accord with the following teaching:

‘Thus, the wonderful diversity of that sentient aspect, (variously) called,
for example, the individual soul (pudgala) or atom (of consciousness) (aṇu),

rests in many ways in the aspect (of consciousness) that is unobscured.


And such statements as:


‘Thus, while the Pervasive Lord (vibhu) reveals His own complete form
(in all His fullness) to one perceiver (pramātṛ), (He does so) to some (other)
part by part, progressively.’'

‘This is the purport’ (concerning the nature) of the two, bondage and
liberation, revealed (here in this chapter) ‘succinctly’, that is, in brief. This is

the way (one arrives at the) connected (prose order and sense of the words).

' PS 5d. This quarter verse is also quoted above in TĀv ad 1/222-223 and below ad

9/144cd-145ab. Cf TĀv ad 6/41cd-42ab.

Above, 1/156abc. Also quoted above in TĀv ad 1/31 and the full verse is quoted

below ad 16/90cd-93ab.
' Above, 1/33ab.

' Above, 1/137.

' Above, 1/140.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

Surely (one may ask,) it was said that the unfolding experience

(prathana) of the (true) nature of the Self is liberation and the Self is one and
undivided, so where does the variety of (forms of) liberation, which is the

realisation of that, come from? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ftreqāīā ftrrārmīq gftzērarac

#zavṝāq
ā## a mōavgī || 3321
mithyājñānaṁ timiram asamān dṛṣṭidoṣān prasūte
tatsadbhāvād vimalamapi tad bhāti mālinyadhāma |
yat tu prekṣyaṁ drśi parigataṁ taimirīṁ doṣamudrāṁ
dūraṁ runádhet prabhavatu kathaṁ tatra mālinyaśaṅkā || 332 ||

False knowledge is a darkness that gives birth to (countless) unique

defects of vision. It is due to its existence (sadbhāva) that (consciousness),
although (perfectly) pure, appears to be the abode of impurity. What one
should perceive, (once placed) around the eye (like collyrium), should block

(and remove)™ to a great distance the disease of (that) darkness which

seals (the eyes) (doṣamudrā). How (then) could doubt (that there is any)
impurity there prevail (again)? (332)
‘Darknessʼ is the Individual Impurity (āṇavamala) which is ‘false

knowledgeʼ, that is, the perception of duality (bhedaprathā), which is
incomplete (apūrṇa) knowledge (vedana). ‘Vision’ is full (and complete)
(pūrṇa) consciousness. It generates ‘(countless) unique defects’, such as the
mistaken identification (of the Self with the body,) which is not the Self. Thus,
because false knowledge exists, although that consciousness (jñāna) is ‘pure’
and also full, it ‘appears to be the abode of impurityʼ, that is, it manifests
itself as incomplete (apūrṇa) by its own freedom. Thus, (it operates in this way)
in the commerce of daily existence, as such is the extent of reality (manifest in
the state of bondage). But on the contrary, what one should perceive as the goal,
that is, (what) one must certainly know, is (that) full (and all-embracing)

consciousness" which is one with the supreme subject. (It is said):

‘I am not the vital breath, nor the body. I am not the mind, nor am I the
intellect, ego or intelligence (ḍhī). I am that aspect which is the knower
(jñāṁśa) who is here (amongst them).”

This translation follows Jayaratha’s explanation. Another, I would say better one,

could be ‘the object of perception transcended (parigata) in the act of perception (dṛsi),

sets aside . . .ʼ

TANTRĀLOKA

Mounted on the plane of (pure) reflective awareness by progressively
divesting (oneself of false identification) in accord with this teaching (nīti), ‘the
darkness which seals (the eyes) (doṣamudrā)’, that arises from the false
knowledge which is the (false) arrogation of Self onto (the body etc.,) that is not
the Self, should be blocked (and removed) to a great distance, that is, it should

be obscured by identifying the Self with what is (truly) the Self. Then what
‘doubt (that there is any) impurity there’ can there be? There is not even the
possibility (then of its prevailing) there (again). Thus, in reality there is neither
bondage, nor liberation (for that matter), of any sort, and so what variety could
there possibly be there? (It is said,) with the same intended sense:
‘In reality there is no world of transmigration, (s0) how can there be any
question of embodied beings being bound? Acting (to achieve) liberation

(muktikriyā) on the part of one who is liberated and who is not bound is not in

accord with reality (vitathā). This (cosmic) illusion (which is like) the rope
(mistaken for a) snake and shade (mistaken for a) demon is a creation of false

illusion. Abandon nothing! Take up nothing! Establishedin yourself just as you

are, take rest! '

' Read tadā for tatra and add iti after mālinyaśakā.

' This is the second verse of Anuttarāṣṭakastotra — A Hymn in Eight Verses to

Anuttara (the Absolute). The first line is quoted again below in TĀv ad 4/92-94
and19/51-53ab (51cd-53), and the last in TĀv ad 5/74cd-75ab (74); cf. below 2/12.
Instead of virama — ‘take restʼ, the published text edited by K.C. Pandey (1963: 943944) reads vilasa and his MS A vihara. Both mean ‘play’.
This hymn is commonly attributed to Abhinavagupta, but this may well not be

so. Jayaratha does not introduce his quotations from it as being by Abhinava, either
directly or by showing some special deference to the author, as he normally (but not
invariably) does when he quotes the master. More significantly, this verse, like othersin
this hymn, appears to present the view of Advaita Vedānta, rather than nondual Śaivism.
The view here is that the worldis illusory. It is a product of the ignorance of the

Brahman, which is the one true reality. This verse refers to the common example, of this
ignorance as the sight of a rope viewed in a dark room appearing to be a snake, for the
semblance of the world superimposed on the real Brahman in the darkness of ignorance.

While this is a good example one from the perspective of Advaita Vedānta, it is not an
apt one to represent the Śaiva nondualist view, which maintains that the world is made

of the energies of absolute consciousness. It is not the product of ignorance. The snake
is not freely produced by the rope as its authentic manifestation, albeit one that obscures
its fundamental basis and true nature, as nondualist Śaiva metaphysics would maintain.
Jayaratha introduces this verse saying that it conveys what Abhinava means to say. But
that is not correct. Abhinava is not saying that the ‘defect of vision’ gives rise to an

illusion of an existent world. He is only saying that it is due to that that one fails to see

that consciousness is pure. It is not, and cannot be, contaminated by any extraneous
reality — as the dualist maintains, or indeed, by any mistaken notions —— as the nondualist

Vedāntin must inevitably accept. The purity of consciousness is its all-inclusive nature,
which excludes nothing, because all that appears in any way is its manifestation. The

view expressed in the Paramārthacarcā appears likewise to be that of Advaita Vedānta,
Both these texts, as Sanderson (2007: 381) points out, ‘survive in Kashmirian

manuscripts with colophons that assert that Abhinavagupta is their author. But I know of
no evidence that confirms this assertion. Nor am I aware of any that refutes it. However,

the fact that Jayaratha cites a line from the former without attribution does not inspire


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

This has been said elsewhere. Now, the ‘darknessʼ is (that) particuḻlar

disease of the eyes due to which the defect of knowing (things) otherwise (than
they truly are) is generated in the (course of the) act of perception. It is blocked
(and removed) by (the reality) that should be seen (as the true object of
perception), which takes the place of collyrium and such things (that cleanse
vision). There (in that case), there is not even a doubt (that there is any)

impurity. Thus, this is the object of the analogy suggested (in this verse).
Now, for those others who, even though they do not know the supreme
profundity of this treatise and its meaning, along with the reality (it teaches),
who, by thinking in some other (contrary) manner, explain it in another
(contrary) way, like something that is turned upside down (uttāna), the

venerable author says the following, to mock them by way of false praise:

ṬTTJT GJTSSTTĀ āCTTJIHĀ ṬTTĀT
r̥̄-IST STSṬTHTĪ ḤqfTTC THTHIIHĒĀTHTĪ || 333
I1
bhāvavrāta haṭhājjanasya hṛdayānyākramya yannartayan
bhaṅgībhirvividhābhirātmahr̥dayaṁ pracchādya saṁkrīḍase |
yastvāmāha jaḍaṁ jaḍaḥ sahr̥dayaṁmanyatvaduḥśi
manye ‘ʻmuṣya jaḍātmatā stutiadaṁ tvatsāmyasambhāvanāt || 333 I|

confidence, since this goes against his usual practice when quoting Abhinavagupta’.
Sanderson is referring to the citation of the first line of this verse in TĀv ad 4/92-94.

That such contamination is possible is exemplified by the Mahopadeśaviṁśatika, which
is another hymn attributed to Abhinavagupta with clear Advaita Vedānta leanings. In
actual fact it is, as Sanderson (ibid. n 485) says: for the most part a reworking and
reframing of the first part (vv. 2-8) of the Nirguṇamānasapūjā, whichis one of the more

than 300 hymns ascribed to Śaṅkarain the South Indian Smārta tradition under the
spiritual authority of the Śaṅkarācāryas of Śṛṅgerī and Kāñcī.’

' Here it appears that Jayaratha is departing from Abhinavagupta, who says, as I have

translated, that the object of perception is transcended. If that is so, it is hard to

understand how it can serve to cleanse perception, as Jayaratha maintains. Perhaps the

point is that as the act of transcending the object in the moment of perception propels
awareness into a state of pure consciousness, the object serves as a springboard and

hence cleanses the vision of the fettered soul, which is focused on the object, not on the
pure consciousness which transcends it. More directly, Jayaratha seems to mean that the
true object of perception as ‘that whichis to be seen’ (prekṣya)is Śiva Himself. The

‘emptiness’ of the first moment in the act of perception is the plenitude of Śiva
consciousness, which cleanses the vision of obscuring thought constructs that arise in
the second moment. Anyway, the practice is to perceive without elaboration. We just

look at things without going into what they are specifically. In this way, it is possible to
experience the underlying fundamental consciousness, which is not objective, and so is
not subject to the limitations of objectivity. In the Buddhist Yoga of Naropa, this

practice is likened to how a child looks with wonder at the paintings on the wall of a
monastery with no idea of what they represent.

TANTRĀLOKA

O You who are all things (bhāvavrāta)! Having forcefully laid hold
of the hearts of men, You dance (like an actor) with (Your) many ways of

acting, and having concealed Your Heart as You do so, play! He who is dull

(and devoid of higher states of consciousness) (iaḍa), thinking he possesses
an aesthetic sensitivity (though he does not), badly taught, says that You
are dull matter (jaḍa). I think that his dull (insensitive) nature (iaḍātmatā)
is entitled to praise by virtue of (his) belief that (he) is the same as You (at

least in this respect)” (333)

‘0 You who are all things!’ (O You who are all) phenomena such as

(the colour) ‘blue’, having hidden Your Heart, and hence Your true nature,

‘having forcefully laid hold of the hearts’ʼ, that is, hopes, of all ‘men’ (who

hold many) views (concerning Your nature) ‘You dance (like an actor) with

(Your) many ways of acting°’, and as you do so, play like an actor, that is, You

manifest with an unreal (artāttvika) form, in accord with the manner
(described in the following verse):

‘“Today He will fashion us from Nonbeing or from Being, or is this,

(the source of our existence), two-fold? (Will He make us) permanent or

impermanent? Mutually separate or undivided?” In this way, 1 think, the

phenomena in the universe, intent on viewing the face of (true) existence

(sadvadana), their hearts blocked by silence, abide with difficulty.’

Thus, one who maintains that everything is insentient (matter),'

although devoid of aesthetic sensitivity, thinks of himself as possessing it, and
so is ‘badly taught’, that is, knows nothing because of (his) false pride (due to
which he identifies himself with the body and his personal existence alone),
says that You, who are all things (bhāvavrata), are ‘dull matter’, that is,
insentient. Thus, we make the following simile. The one who holds this view in

actual fact believes himself to be like You, Who are consciousness, and so if he

says that

You are Yourself like (phenomenal) existence, dull matter

(jaḍātmaṇ), that is praise in the place of deprecation. In reality, the nature of

(all) phenomena is consciousness; if they were not consciously known

' Abhinava himself comments on this verse in DhĀ p. 127.
' In line with this nondualism, ‘unreal’ here does not mean illusory or even not
ultimately real. Śiva manifests as everything both ‘real’ and ‘unrealʼ, ‘relative’ and

‘ultimate, etc. These are ‘forms’ (rūpa) of Śiva. In other words, the view here is not
that the world of phenomena is a product of ignorance, as is the snake which a rope is
mistaken to be. The ‘unreal’ʼ, ‘non-ultimate’ universe of phenomena is a product of

Śiva’s freedom to be that also without this limiting Him and without the universe being
‘unreal’ or ‘non-ultimate’. These forms are Śiva, Who manifests this way to Himself as

the many limited perceivers. These too are similarly ‘unrealʼ and ‘non-ultimateʼ, and yet

not, for the same reason. This is Lord Śiva’s ‘dance’ and ‘play acting’, namely, His

assumption of countless roles. The actor chooses to assume his role. The rope does not

choose to be mistaken for a snake.

'! The expression ‘sadvadana’ means both ‘face of (true) existence’ and ‘philosophy

of Beingʼ.

' Read sarvajaḍavādī for sarvo vād.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------


(acetyamāna) they would have no formal existence (rūpa) (as contents of
consciousness). Thus, those who do not know this are more dull (and insentient)
(jaḍa) than even insentient (jaḍa) phenomena.
So how can their being the

same (sāmya) as phenomena that (are in reality) of the nature consciousness

(which is Deity and so praiseworthy) end up being (an object of) deprecation?

This is the sense (of this verse). Similarly, in relation to the main point also, the
sense (of this verse is) that: may he who does not know the true nature of this
book (and does not understand it correctly), not know it (— that doesn’t matter),

however, if he says anything which differs (from what is taught here and insists

that he is correct), it is he who is dull (and stupid) (jaḍa); it is not a defect at all

of this book.

Surely (one may ask,) if this is the case, then (why not) request some
other learned people to (make an effort to study and) understand this treatise
(śāstra), so that having understood (the matter) here correctly (they) should not
cultivate an aversion (to its teachings)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ṬG:: JGaITNS] JTT-T

ft-kēī šōggaīrāīT-T || 3351

iha galitamalāḥ parāvarajñāḥ
Śivasadbhāvamayā adhikriyante |
guravaḥ pravicāraṇe yatastad
viphalā dveṣakalaṅkahāniyāñcā || 334 ||

As (only) teachers free of impurity, whose nature is the very being
of Śiva and (who) know the supreme (transcendental) and the lower
(immanent order), are fit to ponder (on these teachings), the yearning
(yāñcā) to destroy the defect of aversion (for this work in others) is

fruitless. (334)

There are two (kinds of) people here in (this world) — those who have

not received a descent of the power (of grace) and those who have. The former

may be requested hundreds of times to (make an effort to) understand this
(Tantrāloka), but not even their mind moves (towards doing that). Here (in this

case), one should pay attention (to this), namely, that (simply) requesting (such

people)™ not to cultivate an aversion (to it) has n0 power (to change their
' There is a play of words here that cannot be translated into English. The word ‘jaḍa’

here translated as ‘dull (matter)” and ‘insentient’ also means ‘stupid’ in Sanskrit. So

someone who is ‘jaḍa is ‘stupid’, ‘dull’, ‘ignorant’ ‘unconscious’ and ‘insensitive’, like

insentient matter.

Theṣe are people who have not received grace and are not inspired to study the

Tanīrāloka. It may seem that Abhinava is saying that only fully realised teachers are fit
to study the Tantrāloka. Jayaratha tacitly corrects this impression by referring to such
teachers as ‘supremely fit (paramādhikārin). All those who are recipients of Śiva’s

TANTRĀLOKA

attitude). Whereas the others (who have received grace), even if not requested

(to do 50), they themselves set about (doing what is necessary) in order to

understand this (teaching). There (in that case) also, requesting is useless.

(Accordingly,) he says: ‘the yearning (yāñcā) to destroy the defect of
aversion (for this work in others) is fruitless'. How are (the people) who have
received a descent of the power (of grace)? He says they are ‘free of impurity°,
that is, they are such that the impurity of their ignorance has fallen away. Thus,
those who know the ‘supreme’, that is, the first (and foremost reality beyond
which) there is nothing higher (anuttara) (A), and the ‘lower’, that is the last

(final) emission (visarga) (H), are those who know the vitality of Mantra,
which is the reflective awareness of supreme ‘I'-consciousness. Thus ‘their

nature is the very being of Śiva’, that is, they possess the knowledge (jñāna)
which is (the state of consciousness that is) one with the supreme subject. And
so they are ‘teachers’ who teach the true nature of things. Thus, they are said to
be supremely fit to understand this (Tantrāloka), as they ‘can make (a person)

fit to ponder (on these teachings)’. As will be said (further ahead): ‘The

characteristic.of a teacher is just this, namely, that he should know the first and

last (letters of the alphabet ~ A and H). He who knows this is

as worthy of

devotion as I am (soham iva). He is Bhairava Himself, the deity.

1In

order to show that this chapter and the one that follows are mutually connected,
that is, gathered together as is wealth, he both concludes the end (of this
chapter) and introduces the beginning (of the following one) with just one verse,
for such is the authorʼs style. Accordingly, in (this,) the first half of the verse, he

summarizes the sense (and purpose) of (this) chapter.

E|KIENĒEEEGENPṬGk Eṭ:īṣ]d

tantrāloke ‘bhinavaracite ‘mutra vijñānasattābhedodgāraprakaṭanapaṭāvāhnike ‘smin samāptiḥ |

grace are inspired to exert themselves to grasp its meaning. These, too, he clearly

implies, are fit to study the Tantrāloka, just by virtue of their divinely inspired desire to

do s0.

' The supreme is Anuttara, represented by the lettr A. The ‘lower’ is the last, grossest

form of emission (visarga) (see below, 3/143ab-143cd (3/142cd-143ab) and
commentary), represented by the letter H. Together they constitute the beginning and
end of AHAṀ (‘T), that is, the reflective awareness of the pure ‘I’ of absolute
consciousness.
Below, 3/224.

' The line that follows is the first half of the verse. The following chapter begins with

the second half of the verse. This is how Abhinava links one chapter to the next
throughout the Tantrāloka. It is a feature of the way he writes. Jayaratha points out that
we are told in the first half of the verse, with which this chapter ends, that its sense and

purpose is the exposition of the ‘perfect knowledge’. Abhinava introduces the following
chapter by saying that he is going on to expound ‘the uninterrupted consciousness of the

Absolute’, which is essentially the same subject that he presents in that chapter from
another perspective.


CHAPTER ONE
--------------------------------------------------

This is the end of this (the first) chapter of the Tantrāloka,

composed by Abhinavagupta, which skilfully elucidates the (essential)
being of discerning insight (vijñāna) and its types. (335ab)
This is the auspicious (end) (iti śivam).
Having received a faultless family lineage (janmakrama) from (his

father), the learned and venerable Śrṅgāraratha,' and from the venerable
Śaṅkhadhara a most excellent knowledge of all (the forms of) learning (vidyā)

also, and an understanding of all the Āgamas from Śiva, whose body is the

venerable Kalyāṇa,' Jayaratha has explained the first chapter. May it be an

object of reflection here for the wise! Thus ends the first chapter, called the
‘Elucidation of the Types of Discerning Insight (vijūāna)ī of the Tantrāloka,
composed by the venerable Abhinavagupta, the most excellent and great Śaiva

teacher (mahāmāheśvarācārya). 1t has a commentary called ‘Light’ (prakāśa)

written by the venerable Rājānaka Jayaratha. May this be an offering to Lord
Siva.

Śṛṅgāraratha, Jayaratha’'s father, was a minister of Ṛājarāja (Rājadeva, r. 1213-1236).
He was initiated by Subhaṭadatta, as was Jayaratha. He was a descendent of
Vibhūtiḍatta and author of a lost commentary on the Tantrāloka. See below, concluding

verse 35 of the TĀv.
' Jayaratha has referred to Kalyāṇa above in the introductory verse 2 as the teacher
through whom he attained liberation.

' Sanderson (2007: 240-241) explains that ‘rājānaka’ was a tile give in Kashmir by

the ruler to brahmin ministers and inherited by their descendants. The title has been

given to a number of nondualist Śaiva teachers, including Abhinavagupta himself,
Kṣemarāja, Rāma (who wrote the commentary (vivṛti) on the Spandakārikā), and
Yogarāja. The social standing of these teachers is exemplified by Abhinavagupta
himself, whose inner circle of devotees were members of families of ministers (see

below, 37/66ab-84ab (37/65-83) and PTyv concluding verses 5-10, where Abhinava tells
us about them). Jayaratha reports that his ancestors included ministers under kings
Yaśaskara (r. 939-948 CE), Ananta (r. 1028-1063), Uccala (r. 1101-1111) and Rājadeva
(r. 1213-1236) (see below, concluding verse of the commentary, 8-41).

Appendix A
to Chapter One

The Levels of Sound according to the Netratantra
The levels of Sound of the utterance of OM is a common topic in all the
Śaivāgama, beginning with the earliest ones and continued into the Kaula
schools, and through them up to the present day. It is so fundamental that it is

well known to the Vaiṣṇava Tantras also. The core teaching is a sequence of

twelve stages ranging from A to the Transmental. These mark the stations of
ascent from the Heart up to the End of the Twelve, at the summit of the subtle
body (see notes to 3/112ab-113ab (3/112cd-113)). The epitome of the
development of all seed-syllable Mantras from their audible sound up to their
original divine source, they retract and reverse the downward flow of the
cosmogonic energy of Speech from its supreme form (parā vāc) at one with
Śiva as His reflective awareness and freedom down to audible corporeal Speech
(vaikharī vāc).
Amongst the most lucid and detailed accounts are those in the
Svacchandatantra and the Netratantra that was most probably inspired by it.
Kṣemarāja comments on both of them, thus leaving us as a standard basic
account. There are two presentations in the Netratantra. The first one is
Netratantra chapter 21 verses 59-70ab. It describes the stages from the highest
to the lowest, in descending order. The progression through the levels of Sound
is taught again in brief in chapter 22 verses 21-23 in the sequence of ascent,
from A upwards. It is more convenient to present that first, as it is very similar
to what we find it in the Śvacchanda; indeed, the very wording in places is the
same. The version in the NT appears to be a modification of the one in the
Svacchanda, made to identify stage 9 — Śakti — with Kuṇḍalinī. This is not
stated directly in the Svacchanda, nor commonly in other sources that simple

accept the sequence as it is in the Svacchanda. SvT 4/255 is identical to NT
22/21 (see below). These lines along with the preceding and following two lines

are quoted by Jayaratha in TĀv ad 1/83cd-85ab (84cd-86ab). Clearly, he took
that to be the standard basic reference. They declare that:

‘That (Vidyā with) eleven parts moves continuously within the vital
breath. (They are) the letters A, U and M, along with the Point, the Half Moon,

the Obstructress, Sound, End of Sound, Power, the Pervasive One and the Equal

One, which is considered to be the eleventh.'" The Transmental is beyond that,

and beyond that is the Untainted (Absolute — nirāmaya).” SVT 4/254cd-256
We notice, by the way, that Kṣemarāja comments in much greater detail
on this sequence in the NT than he does in the SvT. This may be taken to
suggest that he wrote the commentary on the NT before that on the SvT and did
not wish to repeat himself. As we shall see in Chapter Eight, the stages beyond
the audible articulation of this ascent are incorporated into the Śaiva cosmology

'"! For SVT 4/255cd śaktiś ca vyāpinī caiva samanaikādaśī smṛtī | NT 22/22ab reads:

kauṇḍalī vyāpinī śaktiḥ saṃanāsś ceti sāmayāḥ|

APPENDIX A CHAPTER ONE

of the Svacchanda and the Siddhāntas. They are distributed in the worlds of the
higher pure principles (śuddhatattva), represented there as both deities and
worlds on the levels of their encompassing spheres (āvaraṇa).
Netratantra chapter 22 verses 21-23
akāraś ca ukāraś ca makāro bindur eva ca |
ardhacandro nirodhī ca nādo nādānta eva ca || 21 ||
kauṇḍalī vyāpinī śaktiḥ samanāś ceti sāmayāḥ |
‘The letters, A, U and M, the Point, Half Moon, the Obstructress,
Sound, the End of Sound, Kauṇḍalī, the Pervasive One, Śakti and the Equal One
(With Mind) are connected with suffering (the sāmaya).” (22/21-22ab)

kauṇḍalīti śaktiviśeṣaṇam | ity ekādaśa mantrāvayavāḥ prāṅnirṇītatattvāḥ
sāmayā heyā ity arthaḥ | tad uktaṁ śrīṣvacchande samanāntaṁ varārohe
pāśajālamanantakam | iti ||
‘Kauṇḍalī’ is an adjective of Śakti. The meaning is that these are the
eleven parts of Mantra, the nature of which was determined previously. They
are connected with suffering and should be abandoned. That is (also) taught in

the venerable Svacchanda:

‘O fair-hipped lady, the net of fetters is endless up to the end of the

Equal One.” (SVT 4/432cd)

tadūrdhvam
niṣkalaṁ cātmatattvaṁ ca śaktiś caiva tathonmanā l| 22 ||

sābhāsaṁ ta1........

samanāntāt kalanāmayād niṣkrāntam, taduccāraṇānte nirāvaraṇam apy
anunmiṣitaśivaśaktivyāptikaṁ . śuddham
.ātmatattvam,
tad
eva
tu
pronmiṣadabhedena
sārvajñyādirīpam
unmanāśaktyātma

tad etat
prameyadvayaṁ paramaśivaviśrānty-anāsādanāt sābhāsam atyaṇīyaḥsaṅkocam
| yad viyatparyantāśeṣaviśvottīrṇaviśva-mayatābhāsakaṁ tat
ṇirābhāsaṁ paratattvam anuttamam |
niṟābhāsam iti prāgvat || 223 ||

Above that is:

‘The undifferentiated (niṣkala) principle of the Self and Śakti, who is

the Transmental. That is manifest (sābhāsa).’” (22/22cd)

It has come out from the culmination of the Equal One, which consists
of the process of differentiation. At the summit of its utterance (and upward

TANTRĀLOKA

movement), it is free of obscuring coverings; even so, the pure principle of the
Self, pervades the Śakti of Śiva, who has not unfolded (into emanation). That
same (principle) that unfolds at one (with all things) is the energy of the

Transmental, which is omniscience etc. That is these two objects of knowledge,
namely that which is ‘manifest’ (sābhāṣsa) and an extremely tiny contraction
(brought about by) not attaining repose within Supreme Śiva. The unmanifest
(nirābhāsa), most excellent, supreme principle illumines all that is transcendent,
right up to the Sky (of consciousness, as well as) the state of immanence. (The
meaning of) ‘unmanifestʼ is as before.

Netratantra chapter 21 verses 59-70ab
1) Únmanā the Transmental

Śśivo hy anādimān dhāma śāśvataḥ prathamo ‘calaḥ |
etat prāg eva vyākṛtaprāyam | sa ca
icchayā ca yadā devi prasaratyavilambitaḥ l| 59 ||
tadā cāsyecchākhyā

mana utkramya gatānavacchinnasvaprakāśasphurattā | eṣaiva ca

(59ab)

Śiva is the beginningless Abode, eternal, the first (of all) and immobile.

That has practically (all been) explained before. And (concerning) that, (Śiva
says):
O goddess, if he streams forth, (unobstructed) without delayʼ (59cd)
Then His (power) that is called the will is —

‘She (who) is the supreme power, the subtle Transmental (unmanā) and

her nature Śiva.”

Having gone beyond mind, she is the radiant pulse of (Śiva’s) own
unconditioned Light. And she is (as described).
2) Samanā - the Equal One, With Mind

astitvamātram ātmānaṁ kṣobhyaṁ kṣobhayate yadā || 60 ||
samanāsau vinirdiṣṭā śaktiḥ sarvādhvavartiṇī|

kroḍīkaroti yā viśvaṁ saṁhrtya sṛjate punaḥ || 61 1

If She disturbs the (limited) Self, which is just Being alone and is the

object of disturbance, she is called Samanā (the Equal One or With Mind), the

power that is present on all the Path. She embraces the universe and, having
withdrawn it, emits it again. (21/60cd-61)

3) Śakti

APPENDIX A CHAPTER ONE

astitvamātraṁ
prakāśātmamahāsattārūpam,
ataḥ
kṣobhyaṁ
samastasūtraṇāsahiṣṇum

yadā

kṣobhayate
śānyātiśūnyādidharāntasamagrajagadāsūtraṇ-ātmanā
sphurati,
tadā
parapramātr̥padāvarūḍhā
āsūtritāśeṣamantavyamananamātrarūpatvāt
samanety uktā |
‘Just Being alone’ is the great universal Being (mahāsattā) whichis the
Light (of consciousness). Thus if Śakti ‘diṣṭurbs’ ‘the Self’, whichis ‘the object
of disturbance’ that cannot bear the stringing together of the Whole (within
itself), (Śakti) shines radiantly as the stringing together of all the universe,
beginning with the Void beyond the Void (i.e. transcendental Śiva) down to
Earth. Then, having descended from the plane of the supreme subject, she is
called Samanā (With Mind), because her nature is just the cogitation on all that
is, namely, the object of cogitation that has been threaded together.
4) Vyāpinī Kuṇḍalā -- the Pervasive One
ata eva sarvādhvani vartate prathamollekhakalpatayā sphurati, ataś ca viśvaṁ
kroḍīkaroti | ayaṁ cāsya kroḍīkāro yad etat saṁhṛtya svābhedātmanā
nīimajjanena

ābhāsya
sṛjati,
idantayā
prathayati,
garbhīkr̥tāśeṣaviśvasṛṣṭisaṁhāra-prapañcamahāsṛṣṭiśaktirīpatayā sphuratīty
arthaḥ | etad eva punaḥśabdena dyotitaṁ punaḥ punaḥ saṁhrtya sṛjatīti yāvat |
saṁhrtyety anena ca śūnyātiśūnyātmavyāpinī bhūr uktā, sṛjatīty anena tu

Śaktibhūmiḥ || 61 || yad āha

Thus, she is present on all the Path and shines radiantly like the initial

outline (of a picture). In this way she embraces (the entire) universe. Her

embrace (of all things) is this: having withdrawn it by submerging, that is, by
the state of oneness with herself (svābheda), and having shone forth as the light
of the Void (śūnyābhāsā), She emits, that is, is perceived as objectivity and, in
the form of the power of the Great Emanation (mahāsṛṣti), which is the ongoing
chain (prapañca) of emanation and withdrawal, shines vibrantly (sphurati). This
is the meaning. That same (process) is indicated by the word ‘again’, in the
sense that ‘having withdrawn it, it emits it’ again and again. The plane of the
Pervasive One (vyāpinī), which is the Void beyond the Void, is (implicitly)
mentioned by (saying) ‘having withdrawn’ and ‘it emits’ the plane of śakti. As
is said:

kuṇḍalākhyā mahāśaktis tṛtīyāpy upacaryate | (62ab)
kuṇḍalākhyety anenāntaḥśūnyabahiṣkṛtapāravaśyātmatākhyāpanena vyāpiny
atra kroḍīkṛteti darśitam | upacaryate saivetthaṁ vyavahriyate || yā
caiṣonmanākhyā

samasta-hāvābhāvāsūtraṇād
bhāvābhāvasāmānyāvabhāsātmasamanāvyāpinīśakti rāpatayā sphuritā, saiva
vācyavācakātmaśāktarūpaṁ viśvam avabibhāsayiṣuḥ kroḍīkṛtavācyaspandavācakāmānyanād rūpatayā prathamaṁ spandata ity āha

TANTRĀLOKA

The great power called Kuṇḍalā is also said, in a secondary sense, to be

the third one. (21/62ab)

By referring to the one ‘called Kuṇḍalā’, that is, by referring to the state
of dependence on another which is the externalized inner Void, (the Tantra)
explains that the Pervasive One is included here. She is denoted figuratively in
this way and is (called Kuṇḍaliṇī) in common practice. Again, this power called
the Transmental shines vibrantly as the power of With Mind and the Pervasive
One which is the manifestation of the universal oneness (sāmānya) of Being and

Nonbeing because it threads through the manifestation of all existing things.
This same (power,) desiring to manifest the universe which is Śakti consisting

of (all) the objects of denotation and (their) denotators, pulses first of all in the

form of the universal Sound (nāda) that denotes the pulsation of the objects of
denotation (vācyaspanda) it has embraced. Thus it is said:

5) Nāda — Sound

dhvanirūpo yadā sphoṭas tv adṛṣṭāc chivavigrahāt | 62 |
prasaraty ativegena dhvanināpūrayan jagat |
sa nādo devadeveśaḥ proktaś caiva sadāśivaḥ | 63 |
sphutaty abhivyajyate ʻsmād viśvaḥ śabdagrāma iti sphoṭaḥ śabdabrahma, ata
eva dhvanirīūpaḥ śabdanasvabhāvaḥ, adṛṣṭād ity anākṛter draṣṭer karūpāt (>
arūpāt)
paranādāmarśātmanaḥ
prakāśānandaghanāt
śivasvarūpād
ativegenāvyucchinnadrutañadīghoṣavat prasarati |
‘If that which, in the form of Resonance, is Sphota, flows forth from
Śiva’s unseen form with great force, filling the universe with (its) resonance,

(then) that is called Sound. He is the God of the gods, said to be Sadāśiva.’

(21/62cd-63)

‘Sphoṭa’ is Śabdabrahman (the Absolute Word). (It is called this

because) it illumines (sphoṭati), that is, makes manifest the universe, which is
the totality of words (śabdagrāma), from itself and so is the Resonance, which

is śabdana — utterance. It ʻflows forthī ‘with great force’, like the roar of a
fast, continuously (flowing) river, from Śiva’s nature, which is the dense

(uninterrupted) bliss of the Light (of consciousness), and nature the reflective

awareness of Supreme Sound. (It issues forth from) the ‘unseen’ formless
perceiver.
kīdṛk? dhvanīnā ghaṇtānuraṇanarūpeṇa nādāntena jagad viśvam āpūrayan
āmarśanena
ātmasātkurvanṉ

sa
eva
nādabhaṭtārako
'krtakāhantedantāsāmānādhikaraṇyavimarśātmaka-paraciprakāśarāūpa
iti

sadāśiva

iti sāmānādhikaraṇyokter āśayaḥ

| prasaratīty uktyā

paravākśaktir eva pārameśvarī iyaṁ sphuratīty ādiīśati | atra ca nādānto ‘py
anupraviṣṭaḥ l| 63 ||

APPENDIX A CHAPTER ONE

6) Nādānta — the End of Sound

How is it? (t does so) ‘filling the universe with (its) resonance’, that is,
as the End of Sound, the form of which is (like) the resonance of a bell (just
after it has been struck). It makes (the universe) one with itself by the reflective

awareness (amarśana) (of its sonic nature). That same (Resonance) is the Lord
Sound, who is the light of supreme consciousness, which is the reflective

awareness that is the common foundation (sāmānādhikaraṇa) of objectivity and
uncreated subjectivity. This Sound (nāda) is Sadāśiva. This is (the point that is)
intended by referring (to them together) on the same level. By saying that ‘it

flows forth’ is indicated that the power of Supreme Speech, which is that of the
Supreme Goddess, shines vibrantly. Here, it has also entered into the End of
Sound.

7) Nirodhinī — the Obstructress
atha
dhvanir adhvagato yatra viśrāmyaty anirodhitaḥ |
nirodhinīti vikhyātā sarvadevanirodhikā || 64 |

adhvagato `śeṣavyāpako ‘nirodhito ‘nāhato nādabhaṭṭārako yatra viśrāmyati
svavyāpti-nimajjanenādharavyāptim unmajjayati, sā nirodhikākhyā mantrakalā
vikhyātā | kīdṛśī’ sarveṣāṁ brahmādidevānāṁ nirodhikā ūrdhvavyāptyā
dhārikā yathoktaṁ śrīṣyacchande
nirodhayati yā devān brahmādīṁś ca surādhipe |

nirodhiketi sākhyātā | (SVT 10/1223abc) iti || 64 |I

Where Resonance is present on the Path and rests unobstructed, it is

called Nirodhinī (the Obstructress), who obstructs all the gods. (21/64)

The Lord Sound ‘present on the Path’ is Unstruck Sound that,
unobstructed. pervades everything without exception. It is where he ‘rests’, that
is, by immersing into his own pervasion, he causes the lower pervasion to
emerge. That is an energy of Mantra called Nirodhikā - the Obstructress. How is
it? Suṣṭaining by the pervasion of the upper (higher realities), she obstructs all
the gods, that is, Brahmā and the rest (from rising higher beyond their status).

As is said in the venerable Svacchanda:

‘O queen of the gods, She who obstructs (nirodhayati) the gods,
Brahmā and the rest, is called Nirodhikā. (SvT 10/1223abc)
paraṃaśivābhedākhyātir eva brahmāder nirodha ity āha niruddhasya
maheśatvamahimā na pravartate | ataścābhedākhyātyaiva tatrasthānāṁ
nānātvam ity āha
asaṁkhyātās tu koṭyo vai mantrāṇāṁ tatra saṁsthitāḥ || 65cd II
kiṁ ca
labhante tat praviṣṭā vai...…. (21/66a)

TANTRĀLOKA

ye tad nirodhikāpadaṁ praviṣṭā yoginaḥ, te tad eva labhante, na ūrdhvam

abhedavyāptim | tad ity āvṛttyā yojyam l

What obstructs Brahmā etc. is ignorance of Supreme Śiva’s oneness.
Thus it is said: The glorious power of Maheśa’s state does not operate in the
case of one who has been obstructed. Thus, it is only because of ignorance of
oneness that those who are present there are many. Thus, it is said:
“There are countless billions of Mantras present there. (21/65cd)

Moreover: ‘Those who have entered attain that . . .’
Those Yogis who have entered into that plane of the Obstructress

(Nirodhikā) aṭtain only that, not the pervasion of oneness which is above. One
should add ‘that’ for a second time (i.e. those who have entered that attain
(only) that).

yā ceyaṁ dhvanimātrātmanādāntavyāptinirodhikākhyā māntī kalā
...-ša binduś ceśvaraḥ smṛtaḥ | (21/66b)

paraiva śaktir icchāśaktivyāptyā samanātaḥ śaktyantaṁ padam unmīlya
jñānaśaktivyāptyā
śaktiprādhānyam
unmīḷayantī
samastavācakābhedinādāmarśamayatāṁ
dhvanimātrātma-nādāntavyāptyābhāsitāṁ
.nirudhya
samagravācyābheda-prakāśarūpāṁ
sphuṭed
antāhantaikya-vimarśātmeśvararūpabindvātmmatāṁ

na
ca
nirodhikāpadābhāsanasamanantaram eva bindvātmatāṁ gṛhṇāti, api tu madhye
8) Bindu — the Point

This energy of the one who recites Mantra that obstructs the pervasion

at the End of Sound which is (pure) Resonance alone is:
‘the Point which is said to be Īśvara’. (21/66b)

OŌnce the Supreme Power has, by the pervasion of the power of the will,
opened up the plane from the Equal One to the end of Śakti, and is engaged in
opening up the predominance of Śakti by the pervasion of the power of
knowledge, and having blocked what has been illumined by the pervasion of the

End of Sound, which is just (pure) Resonance alone, and is made of the

reflective awareness of the Sound which is the oneness of all denotators
(vācaka), (then) Light, which is the oneness of all the objects of denotation,

shines forth (sphuter), and it assumes the nature of the Point — Bindu — which is
Īśvara, who is the reflective awareness of the oneness of inner subjectivity
(ahantā).

9) Ardhacandra —- the Half Moon

APPENDIX A CHAPTER ONE

Moreover, it does not assume the nature of the Point after the
manifestation of the plane of the Obstructress; rather, (that happens) in the
middle:
yadā śivāmṛtaṁ miūrdhni patati sṛṣṭikāraṇam

āpyāyas tu bhavet tena so ‘rdhacandra iti smṛtaḥ |

vimarśapravaṇanādakalāvācyasaṁhārapradhānā
svasattā
nirodhena
nirodhinīpadaṁ .śritvā samastavācyābhedavedanātmabindudaśāṁ siṣṛkṣuḥ
prathamaṁ .kũṁcidunmajjadvãcya-pradhãnãm ardhacandradaśãṁ Sśrayatĩti
tātparyamḷ
‘If Śiva’s nectar, which is the cause of emanation, falls on (one’s) head,

(one is) nourished, and so that is called the Half Moon.’ (21/66cd-67ab)

One’s own Being (svasattā), predominantly (in the state of) withdrawal

of the object of denotation, is the energy (and phase) (kalā) of Sound inclined to
reflective awareness. Having entered onto the plane of the Obstructress by
blocking (it) and desiring to emit the plane of the Point (Bindu), which is the
experience (vedanā) of the oneness of all objects of denotation, it comes to rest
first of all on the plane of the Half Moon, which is predominantly (that of) the
object of denotation that is emerging to some degree (out of subjectivity). This
is the general sense.
padārthas tu śivasya nādātmanaḥ sadāśivanāthasya saṁbandhi amr̥taṁ sphuṭed
antābhāsātma sṛṣṭivīryaṁ sraṣṭavyasya viśvasattātmanor vindo mūrdhni patati,
bindūdayāt prathamam unmiṣati yadā, tadā sa mantrāvayavo ʻrdhacandra ity
ucyate, yatas tena āpyāyo bhavet tadbhūmikārūḍhasya pūrṇacandrākārā sraṣṭrī
bindvātmā kriyāśaktidaśā udayate ||
The nectar, which is an entity (padārtha) associated with the Lord

Sadāśiva, who is Śiva’s nature as Sound, shines forth (sphutet). The vitality of

emanation of that which is to be emananted, namely, the Being of all things, is

the inner shining (of the Light) of Bindu. (This) “falls on one’s head’. If, by the
emergence of Bindu, it is the first to unfold, then that is that part of Mantra
which is called ‘the Half Moon’. Thus, one who has mounted onto that plane is
‘nourished’; that is, the state of the power of action which is Bindu, the creator
whose form is the Full Moon, dawns.
eṣa(sāṁ) cārdhendur bindupadād ūrdhvam ārohatām
saṁhāraḥ sarvabhũtānãṁ...

nādād adho ‘varohatāṁ tu

srṣṭikāraṇam eva ca || 21/67 |
tad
itthaṁ
bindvātmakriyāśaktau
prṛthagbhūtavācyavācakamantra-daśādarśanāyāha

makāro hy atra vai rudro varṇasaṅghaṭṭa uttamaḥ |

binduḥ
prṛthagbhāvam
avabhāsayan
māyāśrayapumāmarśimakārarūpeṇa bhavati |

prathamaṁ

TANTRĀLOKA

This Half Moon, rising above the plane of Bindu, ‘the withdrawal of all

living beings (takes place).’ (21/67c) And descending below Sound ‘it is the

cause of emanation.” (21/67d) This is said in order to reveal the plane of Mantra,

in which the object of denotion and the denotator are separate when the power
of action which is Bindu is in this way clearly (functioning):
10) The Letter M

‘Here, the letter M is indeed Rudra, the most excellent conjunction of
phonemes (saṅghata).’ (21/68ab) In the course of this, the diversity that Bindu
generates manifests. It is initially (in the form of) the letter M that contemplates
the individual soul that rests in Māyā.
atra ca rudro ʻdhiṣṭhāteti śeṣaḥ | eṣa ca makāraḥ prastutapraṇavāpekṣayākārokārābhyām, mantrāntarāpekṣayā tu varṇāntarebhyo ‘py uttama utkṛṣṭo
‘tiśayena udgata ūrdhvavartī ca varṇānāṁ saṅghaṭṭo viśrāntiṣṭhānam,
piṇḍākṣarasaṁbandhino hi varṇās tattattattvavācakatāṁ bhajamānā yāvan na
māyāgranthyudbhediplutoccāra-makāradhvanirīpatām āviṣṭāḥ,
tāvan na
viśvavedyāvibhedivedanātma-binduvyāptīm
āviśanti

/plutāntaṁ
ca
dīrghahrasvatad-varṇanīyavācyasattāstīty api ca varṇasaṅghaṭṭaḥ
Here Rudra is the presiding (Lord). This is what remains (that is
implicitly stated). And this letter M is ‘the most excellent’ with respect to the
letters A and U of the praṇava (OM) we are talking about, and so too with
respect to other Mantras and other phonemes (structured in this way). It is
better, that is, excellent, (in the sense) that it has opened up exceedingly and is
the ‘conjunction’ of the phonemes that is above (them as) the place (where they)
rest. The phonemes associated with syllabic Mantras (piṇḍākṣara) are the
denotators of specific realities (tattattattva). As long as they have not assumed
the form of the resonance of the letter M which, by its prolated utterance
(plutoccāra), rends assunder the Knot of Māyā, they do not enter into the
pervasion of Bindu, which is the state of consciousness (vedanā) that is (one

and) undivided from all the objects of denotation. And the (universal) Being of
the objects of denotation that are described by the long and short (utterances of

long and short vowels) is (found) at the end of the prolated (utterance), and this

is also the ‘conjunction of phonemes (sarghaṭta)’.
itthaṁ ca pūrvoktā śaktir māyāgranthyāśrayamakārātmamantrāvayavarāūpatām
āpannā viśva-jagadātmatayā
yadā sthitiṁ ca labhate svonmukhaṁ sṛṣṭikāraṇam || 68 II
pratiṣṭhākhya ukāras tu viṣṇuḥ sākṣād bhavaty asau |

svonmukham iti svatra saṅvidrūpe unmukhaṁ kṛtvā pramāṇapradhānatvāt
sthitidaśāyāḥ pramāṇasya ca jñeyācchuritasaṁvidrāūpatvād evam uktam, ata
eva sṛṣṭer meyapradhānāyā daśāyāḥ kāraṇam |

APPENDIX A CHAPTER ONE
In this way, Śakti, who was mentioned before, assumes the form of a

part of the Mantra, as the letter M, that has as its locus (āśraya) the Knot of
Maāyā, and as the nature of all the universe. (Then)
11) The Letter U
‘if the letter U, which is called ‘steadfastness’ (pratiṣṭhā), attains (the
state of stable) persistence (sthiti), which is the cause of emanation directed

towards itself, it is Viṣṇu (himself) directly (present and) apparent.’ (21/68cd-

69ab)

It is said to be ‘directed towards itself’ because, having directed itself
(inwardly) into consciousness in all respects, as it is predominantly the means of
knowledge; the phase of persistence and the means of knowledge are
(essentially) consciousness covered over with objectivity. Thus, it is ‘the cause
of emanation’ʼ, which is the phase (daśā) in which the object predominates.
pramāṇarūpasaṁvidantarvartina eva hy ābhāsāḥ prṛthagvimṛśyamānāḥ
prameyatayā sṛjyante | atra ca matsyavalanasaṁyogād galake mīnam āśritā | iti

pūrvāparakoṭyor
dolanena
galakoṭare
kṛtapadā
saṁvidunmiṣanmeyātmakokār-āmarśarūpā ukārākhyo mantrāvayava ucyate |
The manifestations (ābhāsa) that are within consciousness in the form

of the means of knowledge, that are to be perceived individually, are emanated
as the object of perception. Again here (concerning this state), the teaching
imparted in the Kula of the venerable Mīna(nātha) (declares that) ‘(this state)
rests on (āśritā) the fish which is in the throat because it is associated with the
moving to and fro of the fish (matsyavalana)’.

(The meaning is) that it has taken up (its) place in the cavity of the
throat by the swinging (to and fro) between the prior and subsequent extremity
(of the movement of the breath), and its form is the reflective awareness of the
letter U, which is the object of knowledge (that emerges) as consciousness

unfolds. (This is) said to be the part of the Mantra called the letter U.

sa
ca
pratiṣṭhāyāṁ .. garbhīkṛtābādiprakṛtyantatrayoviṁśatitattvāyāṁ

saṁkhyãnaṁ
prathā
yasya,
ata
eva
tatpadādhiṣṭhātr̥ṣṭhitisaṁvin-mayaviṣṇubhaṭtārakāmarśitvāt sākṣād viṣṇuḥ |
The experience (prathā) (of that letter) is the meditation (saṁkhyāna)

that takes place within (the sphere of energy) called Pratiṣṭhākalā, which is
Pratiṣṭhā, that consists of the twenty-three principles from Water to Prakṛti

encompassed (within it). Thus, because it contemplates (āmarśin) Lord Viṣṇu,
who is the consciousness of persistence and is the (Lord) who (sustains and)
presides over that plane (of existence), it is Viṣṇu himself (sākṣār) who is

directly (and clearly) apparent.

TANTRĀLOKA

evarṁ

vadan

garbhĩkr̥tapumãdĩmãyãntatattva-saptakaṁ
vidyākalāvyāptir
ity

anumantavyam iti śikṣayati ||
One should consider that, amongst other things, it is taught that as one
goes on uttering that (pratiṣṭhā) in this (same way), the pervasion of Vidyākalā
(develops. It consists of) the group of seven principles beginning with the
individual soul and ending with Māyā encompassed (within it), and is
predominantly the phase of withdrawal of the energy of the letter M.
atha kaṇṭhād avaruhya hṛtpadmaprāptāyāṁ saṁvidi

nivrttis tu yadā sarvaṁ niṣpannaṁ praṇavaṁ vibhuḥ l| 69 |
akārākhyaṁ paraṁ dhāma brahmā sa kamalāsanaḥ |

prthvyantatattvasarganivṛtter nivṛttiḥ | ataścāvarohakrameṇaitadantatvāt
praṇavasya akāra ā samantāt khyānaṁ tasya tad akārākhyaṁ paraṁ dhāma |
12) The Leṭter A

Now, having descended from the throat and reached the lotus of the

Heart within consciousness:

‘If all the praṇava, the pervasive Lord, has been produced, then that is
Nivrṭti. It is called the letter A and is the Supreme Abode. That is Brahmā
whose seat is a lotus.” (21/69cd-70ab)
(The sphere of energy called Nivṛtti) is the completion (nivṛtti) of the

last principle, which is Earth. The letter A of praṇava is the knowledge
(khyāna) of that in all respects; that is ‘called the letter A and is the Supreme
Abode.”
prakarṣeṇa nūyate stūyate ‘bhedena vimṛśyate ‘nena paraṁ dhāmeti kṛtvā
praṇavaikadeśo ‘py akāraḥ pradeśo ‘pi brahmaṇaḥ sārvarūpyam anatikrāntaḥ |

iti sthityā praṇavaparadhāma sāmānādhikara

a nirdiṣṭam | yac caitad

akārātmarūpam,
.tadbrahmarūpavācitvāt
sṛṣṭipradhānasaṁvidāmarśitvād
hṛtkamalakarṇikārūḍhatvāc ca brahmā kamalāsana iti cocyate | dvādaśāntavad
hṛdo‘pi pūrṇasaṁvittvāt paradhāmety ucitaivoktiḥ |l

‘It is praised as the most excellent’; that is, it is contemplated as one.
(Thus,) having considered it to be (krtvā) the Supreme Abode by virtue of this
(oneness), although it is only in just one place within the praṇava, in accord

with the teaching (sthiti) ‘although the Absolute (Brahman) is (equally in each)

place, (t is) omniform and unsurpassed,’ it is declared to be praṇava’s Supreme

Abode as the common basis (of all its parts) (sāmānādhikaraṇyena). Moreover,

the form which is this letter A is said to be ‘Brahmā, whose seat is a lotus’,
because he denotes the nature of that Brahman. It is contemplated as the
consciousness which is predominantly emanation, and is seated on the calix of
the lotus of the heart. (Thus,) it is rightly said that, like the End of the Twelve,

APPENDIX A CHAPTER ONE

the Heart is also the Supreme Abode because it is full (and complete)
consciousness.
ÁRRNNR ÃR RR N N-ṀĒTĒTEEETTTTPTEHḤ

In order to make this account easy to comprehend, I have reproduced
here an exposition of this the ‘Ladder of Sound’ (nādasopāna) found in an

earlier work (see Dyczkowski 1992a: 252-255). The presentation is reversed. It

starts from the bottom, lower phases, and works up as follows:

1-3) The first three stages are the three audible letters of OM, that is,
A, U and M. As they are uttered, one passes through the three states of waking,
dreaming and deep sleep, to which they respectively correspond. The ‘Silence’
beyond contains the resonance which represents the higher Fourth state, in
which the identity of the Self and the Absolute is progressively realised. They
culminate in the energy of the Transmental (unmanā), which fuses with
Supreme Śiva. After the three audible stages come the following nine, which are
as follows. Note thatin the previous citation the sequential orderis Point, the

Half Moon, the Obstructress, and Sound etc. In the VBh (4, 12), the order seems

to be Sound, the Point, the Half Moon and the Obstructress. The sequence given
below is attested in NT 22/21-22ab.
4-5) The Half Moon and the Point. The upward progression
corresponds to the process of withdrawal (saṅhāra). In Pratyabhijñā terms,
objectivity is initially merged into the subjective aspect of consciousness, which
is then absorbed into the pure consciousness that transcends subject and object.
Above the audible sound of the syllable OM comes the sphere of the ideal
objects denoted by speech (vācya), represented by the Point and the Half Moon.
The Point symbolizes the union of transcendental Śiva and His energy, which
corresponds to the sphere ofimmanence. It is energy gathered togetherin a
highly concentrated state that contains in potential the entire sphere of
manifestation. The Half Moon represents the point at which this potential is just
about to actualize itself, and emerges to manifest externally. As such, it is said

to be the ‘vitality of emission’ (sṛṣṭivīrya) that manifests objectivity and, nectar-

like, falls onto the Point, that contains what is to be made manifest. It is the first
sign of the awakening of the Point and its rupture. The Half Moon goes on to
develop into the Full Moon of the Point once filled with the ‘nectar’ of the bliss,

which accompanies emanation. In this way, the energy of the Half Moon emits
in the descending phase and withdraws in the ascending one.
6-7) Sound and the End of Śound. ‘Sound’ (nāda) is the name given
to the pulse (spanda) of the supreme level of Speech (parā vāc) which animates
the highest reality. The Netratantra refers to it as a form of sound that pervades
the universe. Kṣemarāja explains that the energy of the higher levels initially
manifests in two aspects. One is subjective, as the aggregate of the energies of
Speech that function as the denotators (vācaka) of the second aspect, which

consists of the aggregate of the energies of Speech which they denote (vācya).
When the initial impulse towards manifestation arises, the energy of
consciousness retains the pulse of the second aspect within itself and expresses
the pulse of the first aspect in the form of undifferentiated Sound. As this Sound

TANTRĀLOKA

is the denotator of the world of objects, which are its denoted meaning, it

manifests (sphuṭati) the universe, and so is called the ‘manifestor’ (sphota). As

such, it is the aggregate of phonemic energies (śabdagrāma) that generates the

universe identified with the Sound Absolute (Śabdabrahmanṇ) — the absolute

reality in the form of sound (dhvanirūpa, śabdanasvabhāva). Viewed froṃ the
reverse perspective, Sound is the resonance that follows the Point, that
condenses the energy of mantra which, through Sound, merges into Śiva’s
energy. Accordingly, it is defined as that which remains of the synthetic
awareness of the conscious subject in itself when the duality of thought comes
to an end.
Sound is the reflective awareness of the energy of transcendental

consciousness which, becoming conscious of itself, assumes the form of
‘Unstruck Sound’

(anāhatadhvani). It

is not manifest as the individual

phonemic energies of Speech, but is the phonemic energy (varṇa) of all these as
the instrumental cause of their manifestation, and underlies them when they are
manifest individually. As such, it can be identified with the emissive power of
consciousness (visarga), as yet unmanifest, that resides in the junction between
transcendent Śiva and his immanent energy. The Netratantra identifies it with
the Sadāśiva principle, which corresponds to the state in which manifestation
rests in Śiva’s energy. The philosophy of Kashmiri Śaivism — the Pratyabhijñā —
explains it in phenomenological terms as the state of consciousness which,

conscious of itself in its essential subjectivity (ahantā), contains within itself all
the objectivity (idantā) that is to be made manifest.

The ‘End of Sound’ (nādānta) is the stage in which Sound dissolves
into Energy, which is the following stage, and the point of entry into the
principle of Power (śaktitattva). It is said to be like the final resonance
(anuraṇana) of a bell, that can be faintly distinguished just before the sound of
it ceases completely. It is also said to be like the sound of running water
because, even though there is no physical sound, the ‘resonance’ of the energy
of consciousness is rapid and indistinct. At this stage, Śiva has a global
consciousness of the universe that resides within Him, and is pervaded by the
evanescent vibration of the End of Sound. Here the unity of the aggregate of
phonemic energies, made manifest as the End of Sound, is full of the power of
the supreme form of Speech, from which it issues forth.
8) The Obstructress (nirodhikā). The ‘Obstructress’ is the sound
energy above the End of Sound which separates the lower, outer sphere from the
higher inner one. Sometimes identified with Raudrī (Cf. NT 22/39 and below
comm. to 3/66ab-66cd (3/66cd-67ab) and 6/57ab (6/57)), this energy blocks or
obstructs (nirodhikā) the divine beings that govern the lower spheres,
preventing them from rising beyond it and being capable of perceiving the
higher undifferentiated unity. This state represents a serious obstacle to the
yogi's ascent, but if he manages to rise above it, it can also help to prevent him
falling below it. Due to the dual function of the energy operating at this level,
the Netratantra refers to it not only as the Obstructress, but also as the power of
mantra (mantrakalā). As such it is the energy of the higher order of beings that
operates through mantra. It is the level on which the energy of mantra is
particularly powerful and helpful in maintaining the higher states.

APPENDIX A CHAPTER ONE

9-11) Energy, the Pervasive and the Equal One. The final phase of

the End of Sound merges into that of Energy, which is its source in which it
abides, as the pulsation (spanda) of its potency. It marks the beginning of the
union of Śiva with His power that takes placein three stages, manifested by the
three energies called the ‘Pervasive’ (vyāpinī), the ‘Equal One’ (samanā) and
the ‘Transmental” (unmanā), respectively. Actually, ‘samanā’ literally means
(the energy) ‘with mind’ʼ, in contrast to the one that follows, which is ‘unmanā’”
— ‘without mind’. However, the texts often explain the term ‘samanā’ as if it

were ‘samāna’, meaning ‘of the same (sa) size (māna)’, that is, ‘equal’. This is

the experience at this level — i.e., one of the ‘equality’ of all things realised to be
all the one, universal divine consciousness. The first of these energies ~ the
Pervasive — is immanent in manifestation and, pervading it, gives it life. The
second - the Equal One With Mind- is transcendent evolving into immanence.

It marks the stage where the first pulse (spanda) of consciousness takes place

that gives rise to the universe of manifestation. It absorbs it into itself when it is
reabsorbed and projects it out of itself when it is emitted.
12) The Transmental — the Goddess Beyond Mind. The last stage of
this ascent is the Transmental (Unmanā). Iṭ is the supreme transcendental

energy thatis united with Śiva andis virtually one with Him. It is the highest
and most subtle limit of immanence. As such, it is the final point of transition
into Śiva, which it pervades and in which it is stilled. Thus, it is described as the
transcendental Void of the energy of consciousness, and as uncreated, immobile
Speech. Beyond Mind, this is where the basic mental state (manasatva) of the

mind (manas) ceases. The door to liberation, according to Woodroffe, it is the

‘secret teaching of all the Tantras’, and is indeed common doctrine to virtually
all developed Saiva and Śākta Tantric traditions. It is not only the highest of the
series of states leading progressively to the liberated state; it is also a positive
power that brings it about by severing the bonds of attachment to the world
(Woodroffe 1981: 425). On the threshold of transcendence, the Transmental is

the supreme transcendental energy thatis united with Śiva andis virtually one
with Him. Kashmiri Śaiva teachers identify the Transmental with Spanda — the
subtle activity of divine consciousness. Although a stage lower than Śiva,
Spanda is elevated in the school by that same name to the level of the supreme
principle. The reason for thisis essentially the same. Spanda /the Transmental
/the Goddess are the experience of the supreme reality called the Śāmbhava
state. As the higher stage contains the ones below it, the highest stage — the
Transmental — contains in itself all the phases of manifestation merged in the
process of ascent, and so conversely, contains in a potential form all that is to be
emitted. The Transmental thus lies at the interface between the sphere of
phenomenal manifestation and Śiva’s sphere and links the two. Through and by
the Transmental, the energies in the upper sphere pour down into manifestation
as the world of phenomena, on the one hand, and as the liberating teachings of
the tradition, on the other. Thus, it is not only the port of entry into the upper
sphere of the liberated condition; it leads upwards to it.
See also TĀ 5/56cd-57ab 6/161-162 and notes etc., 8/383cd-385ab (383-384),

8/425ab (424cd) 23/37-38, TĀv ad 29/156cd-157ab, and 29/160cd-161ab. See
also Torella 1979b: 69, note 11, Dupuche 2003: 664, and Padoux Vāc p. 408 ff.

Appendix B
to Chapter One
The End of the Twelve: A Comparative Table
It is convenient to refer to the Śaiva Siddhānta sources analysed by
Brunner in her work on the Somaśambhupaddhati. They are: 1)
Somaśambhupaddhati (nirvāṇadīkṣāvidhi) verses 231-236; 2) SVT 4/263-267ab,
342cd-348 and 350-355; 3) Prāsādacandrikā quoted in the Kriyādīpikā (p. 96).
The same passage is quoted by Anantaśambhu in his commentary on the
Siddhāntasārāvali (p. 39) where it is attributed to the Vātulāgama. The

Siddhāntaśekhara (p. 368-370) agrees with this source. Brunner supplies three
diagrams drawn on the basis of these sources depicting their location in and
above the body. These have been integrated into the table on the opposite page.
The reader’ʼs attention is drawn to two points.
Firstly, īin these texts the root mantra (mūlamantra) is not OṀ
(= AUM) but HAUM. However, Brunner explains, referring to various sources,

that this does not make much difference. The letter H is uttered in the navel,
according to Somaśambhu. The remaining part starts from the heart, as does the
utterance of OM. The second point to note is that the SvT and the
Prāṣādacandrikā also mention the measure (mātrā) or duration of the utterance

of each part. In both cases the whole extends for three-and-a-half measures. The
first three measures are for the audible

A U M, and the remaining half is

variously divided into the components of the higher, silent resonance. The End

of the Twelve is thus the ‘location’ of the highest state in the recitation (uccāra)

of the syllable OM, which in the Svacchandatantra īs represented as the Path of
Mantra.

APPENDIX B CHAPTER ONE

1e0JUL

jeoḺ

pe2y 0}

] snoiqōāz
anua
ṇu5 Jo
1510.

JP˚H

ŠPEd

P2TḶ210.
peeṇz10]
PEeēH

T

eaxṣepe|

H

|,@Pix

V

n

Y

[
[
npuag
upu ,
pi1g | pig

IET_ḸT

vuvuas]"bubūābg

2.d

euyuvūt 2ṃ
jo śāi>ug

GOOJ JIEḤ fUOOJ JIEH

J4poḻy ṚDpagy
DPOṆ

z

|zi|

IB

T

JId ] 1AS ] dṢṢ

[=dā1

S

+ō l

7ō ī|. - | n

9I/] | 91V1 | ©

]nīṃ, ] 7

nGāa,

+

ipu
pi1g

Z

EA1ISEPES

tipng | ēōpṅg | ōōpī | 1
eieasr
a] | eeaṣr
ASḶ | eas]
Asṉ || zū1
eisēpe
STPIS

|eas-aeṇy

Z,

T

AÁāuuz oṃ] jo pior

2id

+i
8/

(az1

8 1

+y

=

jomjdo

2sd

A

9++ | 9 + 1

I

JUḌŪEIEUEJg EḌEJFUAÇEIg| EḺḌEEUṬÉḤ]__]
1ouyjdoṉḻ

d5S

FA

(suōāugy uī) uoṣṣū2ixg

2id̃

ápog 2ṇ
jo uteġ


ĀHNIKA 2
============================================================

CHAPTER THREE
--------------------------------------------------

The Supreme Means (Paropāya)
‘The Doctrine of Reflection (pratibimbavāda)

The Light of Consciousness Within Which Everything is Reflected: verses 1-4,
pages 62-70
Only Form is Reflected in a Medium with Form: verses 5-7, pages 70-73

Definition of the Purity of the Medium of Reflection: verses 8-9, pages 73-76

Māyā and Pure Knowledge, Śiva is both the Prototype and its Reflection: verses
10-15, pages 76-85
Only Form is Reflected in a Mirror: verses 16-18, pages 86-88
The Substratum of Reflection and Attendant Causes: verses 19-20, pages 88-91

The Reality and Nature of the Reflected Image: The Teaching of the Mirror:

verses 21-23, pages 92-99

The Reflection of Sound: verses 24-34ab (24-34cd), pages 99-108

The Reflection of Touch: verses 34cd-42ab (35-43), pages 108-118

Consciousness as the Most Excellent Medium of Reflection: verses 42cd-47ab
(44-48), pages 118-123

There is No External Prototype for the Reflection within Consciousness: verses
47cd-59 (49-60), pages 123-132

vii

The Energies of the Lord are the Instrumental Cause of Reflection: verses 60-65ab

(61-65), pages 132-136

The Alphabet of the Fifty Forms of Reflective Awareness

The Sequence of the Arising of (the Fifty Forms) of Reflective Awareness: verses
65cd-66ab (66), pages 136-138

The Letter A as Anuttara and Anākhya, Kula and Akula, Unstruck Sound and
Kaulikīśakti: verses 66cd-67ab (67), pages 138-160
The Letter Ā as the Union of Śiva and Śakti: verses 67cd-70 (68-71ab), pages
160-166
The Letter I as the Power of the Will: verses 71 (71cd-72ab), pages 166-169
The Letter Ī as the Power of Sovereignty: verses 72 (72cd-73ab), page 169
The Letter U as the Power of Knowledge: verses 73 (73cd-74ab), pages 170-172
The Letter Ū as the Decrease of Subjectivity: verses 75 (75cd-76ab), pages 172175
The Neuter Vowels ṛ Ṛ | Ḷ: verses 77cd-81ab (78-81), pages 175-184
The State of Arousal and the Aroused Seed: verses 81cd-87 (82ab-87), pages 185192
The Matrix of Arousal: verses 88-90, pages 192-194
The Neuter Vowels Continued: verses 91-92ab, pages 194-195

The Diphthongs: verses 92cd-93ab, pages 195-196
The Letter E as the Yoni: verses 93cd-95ab, pages 196-200
The Letter AI as the Hexagon: verses 95cd-96ab, pages 201-202
The Letters O and AU as the Powers of Action and the Trident: verses 96cd104ab, pages 202-209
The Trident and the Stainless Principle: verses 104cd-109ab (104cd-108), pages
209-213

The Eight Groups of Eight: verses 109cd-110ab (109), pages 213-215
Bindu — the Point: verses 110cd-114 (110-114ab), pages 215-221

The Sun of the Senses, the Fire and Moon of Subject and Object: verses 115118ab (114cd-117), pages 221-224
The Sun of the Senses: verses 118cd-121ab (118-120), pages 224-226

The Moon of Objectivity and the Fire of the Subject: verses 121cd-123, pages
226-228

The Subject and its Subjectivity: verses 124-131 (123cd-131ab), pages 228-237
Short, Long and Prolate Vowels as Sun, Moon and Fire: verses 132-133 (131cd-

133ab), pages 237-239

The Point of Śiva (śivabindu) as the Light of the Three Abodes: verses 134-136
(133cd-136ab), pages 239-242

Visarga: verses 137 (136cd-137ab), page 242

The Threefold Emission as Śakti, Prāṇa and Parā Kuṇḍalinī: verses (138-141)
(137cd-141ab), pages 242-251

The Dynamics and Forms of Visarga: verses 142ab-146ab (141cd-145), pages
251-255

The Principle of Passion: verses 146cd-148 (146-148ab), pages 256-264
The Emergence of the Consonants: verses 149-154ab (148cd-153), pages 264-272
The Emergence of the Semivowels: verses 154cd-162 (154-162ab), pages 272-

viii
The Emergence of the Śibilants: verses 163-165 (162cd-165ab), pages 278-280
The Sibilant S as the Principle of the Nectar of Poison: verses 166-170ab (165cd-

169), pages 280-289

The Principles of Passion, Poison and the Stainless: verses 170cd-175ab (170-

174), pages 289-298

The Neuter Vowels ṛr Ṛ I LḶ and the Sibilants: verses 175cd-180ab (175-179),

pages 298-301

The Fiftieth Letter, KS: verses 180cd-181ab (180ab-180cd), pages 301-303
The Two Tetrads Y, R, L, V and , S, S, KṢ: verses 181cd-184 (181-184ab),
pages 303-304

The Group of Six Vowels A, Ā, I, I, U and Ū: verses 185-192 (184cd-192ab),
pages 304-311
The Triad A I U: verses 193-195ab (192cd-194), pages 311-312

The Lord United with Emission is AII Things as the Fifty Energies of the Letters:


verses 195cd-197ab, pages 312-314
The Goddess with Eighty-one Parts, Śabdarāśi, Mātṛkā and Mālinī; verses 197cd200ab, pages 314-318
The Oneness (of these Forms of Reflective Awareness)

with Mantra and the Rest

The Cycle of the Flow of AHAṀ that Encapsulates All Things: verses 200cd-

208ab, pages 318-327

The Aesthetic Delight of Śiva’s Power of Emission: verses 208cd-210, pages 327331

The Three Forms of Emission: verses 211-219, pages 331-337

The Triad A IU Continued: verses 220-221ab, pages 338-339

The Five-fold Point (bindu): verses 221cd-223ab, pages 340-344

Mantras are Effective Encompassed by the A and H of AHAṀ: verses 223cd-225,
pages 344-347

The Power of Emission Taught in the Aitareyāraṇyaka: verses 226-228, pages
347-351
Aesthetic Experience as the Arousal of the Vitality of Consciousness: verses 229230ab, pages 351-356

This Vitality is the Source of Life and so Emission is AIl Things: verses 230cd-

231, pages 356-357

Emission is Śabdarāśi, Mātṛkā and Mālinī: verses 232, pages 357-359
Mālinī as Parā and Kālasaṁkarṣaṇī: verses 233-234, pages 359-361

The Aesthetics of Music and the Three Levels of Speech: verses 235-247ab, pages
361-371
The Supreme Triad and the Groups of Six: verses 247cd-250ab, pages 371-373
The All-embracing Wheel of the Twelve Kālikās: verses 250cd-259ab, pages 373-

The Three Ways of Eliminating Creation, Persistence and Destruction: verses

259cd-260ab, page 381

Peaceful Cessation and the Process of Violent Digestion: verses 260cd-265ab,
pages 381-390

ix

The Unfolding Configurations of the Goddesses of Consciousness: verses 265cd-

267 (265-267ab), pages 390-392
The Seal of the Supreme Means is the Awareness that Everything is Reflected in
the
Mirror of Consciousness: verses 268-271ab (267cd-270), pages 393-395
Liberation in This Life (jīvanmukti): verses 271cd-274ab (271-273), pages 395396

The Reflection of the Principles (tattva) in the Fifty Forms of Reflective
Awareness: verses 274cd-280ab (274-279), pages 396-401
I Am the Author of the Cycle of Creation and Destruction that Arises in the
Mirror of My Consciousness: verses 280cd-288ab (280-287), pages 401-407
The Supreme Means is Beyond Ritual: verses 288cd-290 (288-290ab), pages 407408

The Śāmbhava Master: verses 291-293ab (290cd-292), pages 408-410
The Supreme Goal is Siva: verses 293cd-294ab (293), pages 410-41 1

Appendices to Volume Two
Appendix A to Chapter Three: The Moon and the Play of Emission: pages 412-

Appendix B to Chapter Three: The Principles of Passion, Poison and the
Stainless: pages 424-426

Appendi-x C to Chapter Three: Chart of the Sanskrit Alphabet: page 427

Abbreviations
Ajaḍapramātṛṣiddhi
Asiatic Society of Bengal

Atharvaveda

Bodleian Library, Oxford
Brahmayāmala
Bhagavadgītā
Bhogakārikā
B,rhadāraṇyakopaṇiṣad
Chandogyopaṇiṣad

Ciñcinīmatasārasamuccaya

Dharmālaṅkārakārikā

Devīdyvardhaśatikā
Devīpañcaśataka
Dhvanyālokālocana
Government Oriental Manuscript Library, University of Chennai

History of Dharmaśāstra
Indo-Īranian Journal

Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarinī

Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivr̥tivimarśinī

Institut Français d'Indologie de Pondichéry

Istituto Studi Medio ed Estremo Oriente
Iśānaśivagurudevapadáhati
Journal Asiatique

Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bombay
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society
Jayadrathayāmala
Kashmiri Series Edition
Kaulajñānanirṇaya
Kramanayapradīpikā
Kumārikākhaṇḍa of the Manthānabhairavatantra
Kulapañcaśikā
Khacakrapañcakastotra
Kubjikāmata
Kaṣhmiri Shaivism, the Secret Supreme

Kashmiri Series of Texts and Studies

MP
(1 Śk)

MP (2 Tri)
MP (3 AS)
MS
MV

Kramanayapradīpikā
Laghuyogavāsiṣṭa
Mātaṅgaparameśvarāgama
Mahābhārata
Mahānayaprakāśa
Mahānayaprakāśa commented by Śitikaṇṭha
Mahānayaprakāśa by unknown author published in Trivendrum.

Mahānayaprakāśa by Arṇasiṁha
Manuscript
Mālinīvijayottaratantra

xi
MyVv

Munḍ
MrT

MṛTvVK

MṛKri

NGMPP
NSA
NBT

Mālinīvijayavārtika
Monier-Williams

Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad
Mṛgendratantra
Mṛgendratantravr̥tii Kriyāpāda

Mṛgendratantra Kriyāpāda

Mṛgendratantra Vidyāpāda

Nepal German Manuscript Preservation Project

Nyāyabindu
Nyāyabinduṭīkā

Netratantra

Netratantroddyota
Number
Page
Paramokṣaniīrāsakārikā
Parātrīśikā (= Parātriṁśika)

Parātriṁśikavivaraṇa (Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa)

Pāṇini’s Sūtras, the Aṣṭādhyāyī.
Pūrvakāmikā
Paramārthasāra
Pramāṇavārtika
Pramāṇaviniścaya
Pratyabhijñāhṛdaya

Ricerche e Studi Orientali
Rājataraṅginī

Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha
RṚgveda
Śatapathabrāhmaṇa

Sarvajñānottara

Sva/ŚSubodhodayamañjarī
Swami Lakṣmanjoo
Science of Light

Saṁvitprakāśa

Spandakārikā
Spandanirṇaya

Spandapradīpikā
s̄andasadoha

Śivasūtra
Śivasūtravimarśinī

Śivastotrāvali

Śrīmatotara
Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad
Satsahasrasaṁhitā
Somaśambhupaddhati

Svacchandatantra

Svacchandatantroddyota

Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha
State University of New York Press

Siddhayogeśvarīmata
Tattvatrayaparīkṣā

Tantrāloka

Tatvārthacintāmaṇi
Trika Śāstra Rahasya Prakriyā

Tantrasāra
Tantrasadbhāva

Tantroccaya
Taitirīyopaniṣad
Tantravaṭadhānikā
Triśirobhairava

Ūrmikaulāraṇvatantra
Vijñānabhairava

Vāmakeśvarīmata
Vātulanāthasūtra

Yogavāsiṣṭa
Yonigahvaratantra
Upaniṣad
laghu

gúru

commentary


ĀHNIKA 3
============================================================

CHAPTER TWO
--------------------------------------------------

The Penetration into Ultimate Reality Devoid of Means (Anupāya)

May Rudra, Who is attended by victory (iaya) and makes the humble

victorious, be, without any means, victorious. As the Lord of Desire, what desire

does He not fulfil completely?

' Abhinava supplies a summary of No Means in Chapter Two of his Tantrasāra (p. 89),
which is as follows:
‘Now we will explain only (the penetration into ultimate reality which is) devoid
of means (anupāya). One who is penetrated by a firm (intense and continuous) descent of
the power (of grace) discerns (the supreme reality) for himself in this way (as will be

explained), after having understood the teacher’s word (just) once. He then has (the form

of) penetration (samāveśa) (into Supreme Śiva) which is permanent and devoid of (any)
means (to realisation). (If one were to ask) that here (in this case) only intuitive
discriminative reasoning (tarka), which is (the most excellent) ancillary of Yoga, (can in
due course attain the goal,) so how is it that he discerns (that supreme reality immediately
without it)? (In response,) it is said that, of what use can (any) means (of realization) be
with regard to this Supreme Lord Who is self (luminous) Light and (our) own Self? īt
(cannot bring about) the attainment of (His) own nature, because it is eternal, nor
knowledge (of it), because it illumines itself, nor (can any means to realisation) remove a

covering (that obscures Him), because it is impossible for there to be any obscuration, nor
(can there be any means to bring about) entry into that (supreme consciousness) because
there is no one who is separate from (the Light) that enters (into it). And so, because it is
illogical that (any means to realisation) can be separate (from the one reality of
consciousness), what (could be) the means here? Therefore, all this one reality which is

(pure) consciousness alone is not measured by time, it is undivided by space,
unconditioned by limiting adjuncts, it is not limited by (any) form, not taught by words,
and not known by (any) means of knowledge. Moreover, (if any of these factors,)

beginning with time and ending with (some) means of knowledge, serve as an

instrumental means to attaining (Śiva’s) own nature, it is only by virtue of His own free
will.
“(Ultimate) reality is free and dense (uninterrupted) bliss and I am that, and there

itself within me all things are reflected” — he who firmly (without any doubts) discerns
(reality) in this way perpetually possesses that penetration of the Supreme Lord which is
free of (all) means (to realisation). He is not subject to any constraint (to practice), be it,
for example, Mantra, worship, or meditation, nor (does he have to observe any prescribed

manner of) conduct.

‘The network of means (to realisation) does not illumine Śiva. Is (the sun with
its) thousands of rays illumined by a pot?’ Discerning in this way, one of noble vision

should penetrate instantly into Śiva, Who is self-luminous Light.

‘Wherever the radiant pulse (of the Light of consciousness) shines, the Supreme
Lord, Who is all things, shines pure within me.’ Once having known in truth that He

Himself is (my own) Self, there is nothing else that needs be done.”

Abhinava explains the teaching concerning Anupāya as he summarizes it briefly

in the Tantroccaya:

‘There (in that case, i.e., when God is realised in an instant), the Light of the

Supreme Lord shines for some (elevated soul) continuously without having to (resort to


ĀHNIKA 4
============================================================

CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

The Empowered Means (Śāktopāya)
May (the Lord) Who is the supreme vitality of Mantras be victorious;
He Who, conquering the supreme (reality), bestows mastery over the mass of
good thoughts in order to destroy the obstacles brought about by bad ones.
Now, after (having taught) the Divine Means, in order to teach the
Empowered Means that comes next, he announces that (he is going to do s0) in
the second half (of the verse with which the previous chapter ends).

GRJTĪT: THTTTĀTHC |

atha śāktam upāyamaṇḍalaṁ kathayāmaḥ paramātmasaṁvide || 1 II
Now we will speak of the group (maṇḍala) of Empowered Means
(which serve to attain) the consciousness of the Supreme Self.
(He refers to) ‘the group (maṇḍala) of (Empowered) Means’ because
they are many, beginning with the purification of thought (and the rest).
Accordingly, there (in that context), he begins at first to define the

purification of thought announced in the subsequent (detailed) enunciation (of
the contents of the Tantrāloka).

The Purification and Empowerment of Thought (vikalpasaṅskāra)

without Outer Support

' This chapter is about the Empowered Means (Śaktopāya). The penetration of
consciousness that takes place in this category of means is defined in the MV 2/22, as
quoted above in 1/169:
‘The penetration one attains whilst thinking of (the nature of) reality (vastu)
with the mind alone, without (having to practice) the utterance of Mantra (uccāra) (or
the like), is here called Empowered (śākta).” See above, 1/292cd-293 (291ab-291cd) for

a list of the practices taught in this category of means.
The word ‘saṁṅskāra’ means ‘refining, preparing, making ready or fit to do or be

something’. Monier-Williams defines the word in his dictionary as follows: ‘putting
together, forming well, making perfect, accomplishment, embellishment, adornment,
purification, cleansing, making ready, preparation, dressing (of food), refining (of
metals), polishing (of gems), rearing (of animals or plants), cleansing the body, toilet,
atṭire, forming the mind, training, education, correction (also in an astronomical sense
Sūryasiddhānta), correct formation or use of a word, correctness, purity (especially of

pronunciation or expression), making sacred, hallowing, consecration, a sacred or
sanctifying ceremony, the faculty of memory, mental impression or recollection,

impression on the mind of acts done in a former state of existence. It is one of the 24

qualities of the Vaiśeṣikas and is associated with bhāvanā, the faculty of reproductive
imagination. According to the Buddhists [a saṅskāra is] a mental conformation or
creation of the mind (such as that of the external world, regarded by it as real, though

actually non-existent, and forming the second link in the twelve-fold chain of causation
or the fourth of the five skandhas. [It also means] a polishing stone.’


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


The term ‘vikalpa’, here translated simply as ‘thought’, has a complex series of
connotations (see note 3,394). There are two types of perception or ways in which
things are known. One is free of vikalpa (nirvikalpa). Īt iīs a direct and correct

knowledge of things just as they are. According to the Pratyabh

it is the manner in

which consciousness as the perceiver knows the contents of its perception as the

radiance of its own light. This is their ultimate, real (paramārthika) nature. The other
type of perception is ‘with vikalpa’ (savikalpa). It is a differentiated perception’ of
things, in which they are perceived to exist individually and independently in their own
right, different from one another and the perceiver. This is how we commonly perceive
things in daily life. Most nondualist schools consider this to be simply a mistaken
perception of reality. Even so, they all agree that in its own terms, i.e. at the level of
daily life, it is functional. Indeed, daily life would not be possible without vikalpa. This

is how we know the world and can function in it, making use of the things around us to
the degree and the manner in which we know them in this way. Linked to the inner

speech of thought, this is discursive knowledge that can be communicated to others and
shared with them. It can also be analysed and developed conceptually, even
independently of outer objects, although it can also be applied to them to understand

their nature in conceptual terms. Through this knowledge we can make use of them. In

that sense, vikaḷpa is a form of knowledge that can be developed and applied, but it is
not the direct holistic knowledge of reality just as it is in the fullness of its totality. From
that perspective, it is ‘incomplete’ (apūrṇa), ‘partia’ (aṁṣśika) and ‘impure. Pure,
complete and integral knowledge is free of vikalpa and is liberating, just as, conversely,

the former is binding.
AIl this and the many ramifications and implications of what is meant by
vikaḷpa need to be borne in mind. Rather than maintain a complex term in Sanskrit like

this one untranslated, I choose to find a single word equivalent, which in this case is
‘thought’. In various contexts, one or more of the other multiple meanings of the term

vikalpa and what they denote come to the fore, and so it has been translated accordingly

variously as, for example, ‘discursive representation’, ‘notion’, ‘idea’ or ‘conception’.
The last of these implicitly also conveys the sense that vikalpas are both conceptual
creations and are themselves creative. These are distinguished from the creations of

consciousness itself, i.e. its manifestations, which are ‘authentic’ or ‘uncreated’ —

akṛtrima (for an example of this usage see below 4/192, 194). Those created by vikalpa
are ʻartificial’ and ‘created’ — kṛtrima by the mind and intellect (see, for example, below
4/107). The notion we have of ourselves is conceived or ‘created’, as opposed to the
‘uncreated’ supreme sense of ‘’ which is the reflective awareness of consciousness

itself (see above, note 1,460; cf. TĀv ad 5/10cd-1 1ab, also 16/264 (264cd-265ab) ff.).

Thus, vikalpa is an ‘unclear indirect perception of reality. The purpose of the practice

of the means to realization in the domain of the Empowered Means is to make vikalpa
completely ‘clear” (sphuṭa). This involves a progressive transition from the domain of

vikalpa, in which the underlying reality of pure undivided consciousness which is all
things is obscured by vikalpa, to the domain devoid of vikalpa, in which that reality
shines in its pristine purity. The Empowered Means are, one could say, largely forms of
cognitive Yoga that operate in the field of cognition and the mechanisms of discursive
thought that accompany it. The liberated state is essentially the recognition of one’s own
true nature as the pure fully sentient consciousness of Deity free of thought constructs.
We have seen that those who have risen up to this condition by Śiva’s grace practice the

Śāmbhava Means, which serves to make it firm and stable (dṛdha, rūḍha). This is done
by merging and being merged into the reflective awareness of the supreme ‘I’ of the
Light of Siva consciousness which, as its freedom in all respects, articulates itself into

the world of words and the entities they denote. This takes place without it thereby
losing its essential nature and condition as the supreme, transcendental Speech that

TANTRĀLOKA

STT-TĀTGPĪThSTĀĀTYTT ṬRHA |

anantarāhnikokte ‘smin svabhāve pārameśvare |
pravivikṣur vikalpasya kuryāt saṁskāram añjasā || 2 |I
He who wishes to enter into this, the Supreme Lord’s nature,

described in the previous chapter, must purify (his) thought (properly and)
without delay (añjasā).

‘This (Supreme Lord’s) natureʼ is the one (pure conscious) nature,
free of thought constructs. (By saying this, Abhinavagupta) thereby (implicitly)
indicates that (thought) is at rest in the Divine Means. (To achieve this, one

articulates the plenitude of the Light of consciousness, both in the lower domains of
Speech and, as it is in itself, beyond them as their source, ground and ultimate nature.
This continuity downwards into the realms of thought and objective representation

assures, as Sanderson puts it (2006: 46): ‘the fundamental principle of the left’s

soteriology that discursive (savikalpaka-) formulation of the self’s true nature can lead
eventually to its nondiscursive (nirvikalpaka-) realization (sākṣātkāra). It is believed
that thought (vikalpaḥ) of the nondual reality of consciousness can be so intensified

through constant reiteration that it obliterates all other awareness and finally throws off
its dualizing nature to become the enlightened nondual consciousness which until then
had been its object.”
Time, marked by the succession of events which are distinct from one another,
is a vikalpa. It is the notion of progressive development and change. In the domain of
the Divine Means (śāmbhavopāya), there are no vikalpa, as it is based on the reflective
awareness of consciousness free of vikalpa, as ‘complete’ (pūrṇa), ‘authentic”
(akṛtrima) and ‘supreme” ‘F’. Thus, in that sphere of practice, there is no succession

(krama), just direct timeless insight. It operates in the sphere of Śiva, the subject who

contains everything within himself, ranging from the One — Anuttara — right down to

gross Earth. It abides within him as phases or aspects of His divine power or will, which

is at once His freedom (ṣvātantrya) and reflective awareness (vimarśa). It is the Means
based on the unity (abhedopāya) of Śiva’s omnipotent and omniscient will (icchopāya).
Here that is not so. Practice here centres on perception (jñāna), that involves

working in various ways and degrees with the flux of vikalpa. Thus, there is an element
of succession and progression (krama) in a practice belonging to this category, the
Empowered Means, which is based on the power of perception (jñānaśakti). However,
as practice here is also grounded directly in the development of the direct insight which

is the reflective awareness consciousness has of its own nature, it is also non-successive

and only incidentally related to the psychophysical organism.

The sphere of practice of the Individual Means also leads to the liberated state

free of vikalpa, but that is not achieved by working with vikalpa and hence
consciousness directly. This does (as it must) take place, but it is mediated (at least
initially) by the activity of the psychophysical body (see below, 5/2-9ab). It includes

such things as ritual, Yoga, the recitation of Mantra and so on, which are explicitly
excluded in the domain of the practice of Empowered Means. In the sphere of practice

of the Individual Means, the power of action predominates, and it may involve

successive progressions and levels marked by features or locations

psychophysical body, including the dynamics of the vital breath.

in the


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


must) ‘purify’ (thought) by repeatedly pondering etc. on what one has heard
(of the teachings) by the process (that develops) from unclear (notions of Self)
at the beginning, right up to the attainment of the supremely (lucid) state of
clarity (of its true nature) at the end. (In this purified state, thought) assumes
another (contrary) quality (which is direct insight), by virtue of which one
penetrates into the (essential) nature (of consciousness), which is free of thought
constructs. (This should be done) ‘without delay’, that is, quickly, otherwise
(this process of) purification could not develop, because other contrary notions
(would) arise (that prevent it taking place).

Swami Ḷakṣhmaṇjoo teaches that ‘the purification of thought means essentially
the practice of maintaining of a single thought, thereby removing others. But it is more

than a form of concentration. It is also a process of sattarka — ‘right reasoning’ which is
and develops śuddhavidyā — the reality level (tattva) called Pure Knowledge. The
former essentially consists of focused reflection on the teachings, finally to arrive at the

conviction of one’s own identity with Śiva. As such, it is clearly distinguished from

purely intellectual endeavour. Jayaratha refers to this practice at the beginning of his
commentary, where he writes:

‘[am not engaged (in this work) to attain (some) unique status as a writer; nor
(am I doing this) to show off (my) skill with language; rather my desire is that (my)
thought be purified (vikalpaḥ saṁskāravān) by being constantly occupied with this
teaching (artha).

Pure Knowledge greets the fortunate soul who has been graced by rising
beyond Māyā and its domain — the thirty reality levels below it. Here, freed of most its
Impurity, the soul perceives the true identity of the world to be itself at one with Śiva. It

is the insight which is the immanent foundation of the realisation of transcendental Śiva,

four levels above. As such, it is not of course a thought construct. Rather it is the ‘pure
thoughtless thought’ that Jayaratha tells us is “ am all this and all this am I”. This pure
Knowledge is thus the blooming of sattarka — ‘right reasoning’. Accordingly, Abhinava
refers to six levels or degrees of clarity of this ‘pure thought’. There is no reference here

to concentration as such. Thought is not eliminated, it is cultivated and refined to think

in conformity with the teachings, that are realised to be true. Although many, if not

most, philosophies in India maintain that there is a total break between ‘thought’ —

vikalpa and ʻnon-thought’ — nirvikalpa, with the former representing the domain of

ilusion and the later that of insight into the true nature of things, here there is an
unbroken continuity between the two domains. The former develops up from gross to

subtle, that is, from an ‘unclear understanding of reality to a ‘clear one’. The latter

travels down from perfect clarity down to growing obscurity.

See below, note to 4/207-208.

Read sphuṭatamatvāpatti- for sphutatamatvādyāpatti-.
Thought is at rest when practicing in the sphere of the Divine Means. This state of

tranquil repose within consciousness, free of thought, is immersion into Śiva’s nature. It
takes place by an intense descent of the power of grace, requiring very little from the

practitioner beyond openness and fearless consent. If there is a need to enter this state
and so realise one’s own true Śiva nature, it means that thought constructs are arising
within consciousness that obscure it and need be brought to rest within it. This is done

by purifying them, by reflecting deeply on the teachings. The initial unclear notions of
the purport of the teaching, namely, our essential identity with Śiva, thus gradually
become clearer. As they do so, the conviction of their truth is progressively strengthened
by the direct experience induced by Śiva’s grace. This is because, as this process

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask,) everybody agrees that cognitive consciousness
(jñāna) is momentary, and as the thought (that arises) from that is also a form of
cognitive consciousness and so is momentary, how can the purification of one’s
own nature, which is (essentially consciousness) hidden (by thought constructs),
develop? That could (only take place) if (the prior pure consciousness)is stable
(sthira) (and continuous), as is the case for example with the flowers (that are
present in a potential form) in a sesame seed. So howis it that he has said that?

With this doubt in mind, he says:


aqçā aāīsfī] āīraṁ aīsã aqdTcd̄ | 3 1
vikalpaḥ saṁskṛtaḥ sūte vikalpaṁ svātmasaṁskṛtam |

svatulyaṁ so ‘pi so ‘py anyaṁ so ‘py anyaṁ sadṛśātmakam || 3 |I
A notion (vikalpa) (of the sort ‘I am Śiva and this universe is my
glory”), once purified (to some degree), 1) generates another notion, which
is (already) purified by its very nature, and 2) that one also, another similar
to itself (which is more refined), 3) that also another one, and that too 4)
another similar one by nature (thus forming a series of progressively purer,
more refined notions of Self).

Here (in everyday life), the conceptual representation (vikalpa) (that

something is) blue arises from a conceptual representation of ‘blue’. The
conceptual representation of ‘yellow’ does not (arise from that). 1) In the same
way, even if (the first notion of Self) is unclear, because it is being contemplated

in order to make it clear, the state in which the lack of clarity is (in the process

progresses, consciousness shifts from the aspect in which it perceives the nature of
things as external through the medium of thought constructs, to its other aspect, in

which it perceives them within itself and as itself directly, unmediated by thought. AIl
things reside within Lord Śiva and Śiva within everything. But while this realisation is

brought about by Śiva’s grace, the practitioner should take care to apply himself or
herself assiduously to this practice, and do so, as far as possible, without interruptions,
because until the goal is reached, thought-free consciousness tends to revert back to its
opposite aspect.
'The text here is corrupt. It appears that some part of it has been lost and the word order

has been disarranged. Rather than make an extensive conjectured emendation, the most
direct way to arrive at a minimally satiṣfactory text is to omit the reading
utpādasamanantaraṃ eva.

The seed can only give rise to a plant that goes on to bear fruits and then flowers, i all

the succeeding stages of their progressive development are present in some potential
form in the previous ones. This would not be possible if each stage were to be

momentary, that is, totally self-contained and independent. Something already present in
the initial stage must be carried over from one stage to the next to ensure continuity and
growth. Similarly, consciousness must exist initially in a pure state free of the thought
constructs that obscure it before they arise, otherwise it could not arise subsequently

when thoughts have been purified, that is, removed by absorbing them into the pure
conscious nature of the yogi engaged in this practice.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


of) decreasing (bhraśyadasphutatva) is initially attained, so that the (resulting)
notion (vikalpa), which has been refined (to some degree), generates another
refined notion (of Self) like itself (which has also been purified to a higher

degree). (This is not surprising); indeed, it is generally the case that the

production of an effect accords with (the nature of its) cause. This is the
general sense (of this verse). One should understand that (this applies) in the
same way to the succeeding notions (in the series) also. 2) ‘That one also’

(gives rise to) a second one born from that purified notion, and 3) ‘that also
anotherʼ third one, and then again, 4) ‘that one too, another’ fourth one. Here
(in this case, another, subsequent notion) which is ‘similar to itself’ can be

related to (the previous one). Even so, it is said to be a ‘similar one by nature’

in order to indicate that even though (the individual notions) of the chain of

notions are progressively more distant (in nature from one another as they
become more refined), this (does not entail) any loss (hāni) of their (basic)

similarity.

Surely (one may ask,) agreed that from one purified notion another

arises that is similar to that, but then would not the arising of the third (notion)

and so forth, again in the same way, be useless, or else, if (you say that there is)
a difference (between them), would that not compromise (hāni) (their)
similarity? With this doubt in mind, he says:

See below, commentary to 4/5cd.

' The cause here is a notion in the process of being increasingly purified. The effect is

another notion which is also in the process of being increasingly purified, and so has

been purified to a higher degree than the previous one, and will give rise in the same
way to another which is purified to a greater degree, and so on. In this way, there is a
chain of causes and effects that carry on from one to another, both similar with respect

to what they are and also with respect to their potential to develop further.
'' This progression through the first four stages, from unclear to clear notions of the
nature of reality, maintains the similarity between the previous and subsequent notions,
because a cause doesn't give rise to an effect totally dissimilar to itself. More proximate
notions are most similar, those more distant least. Even s0, as they are all related one to
another in this chain of progressive development, there is no logical inconsistency even

if the final, clearest notion develops into a complete and perfect insight into the nature
of reality which is totally subversive of the initial one. For example, we may begin with

an initial understanding of Lord Śiva’s nature as the Lord, Who is so infinitely greater

than us, that He is qualitatively different, as when we feel that He is the creator and we

are His creatures. But as we advance in our practice and understanding of the teachings,

we progressively understand who we really are and Who Lord Śiva is. As we progress,
our notions become clearer, more in conformity with reality, until ultimately we not

only understand conceptually that the Lord we worship is our own true nature, we
experience it directly. In other words, this kind of practice makes use of thought to
eradicate it. Thought does not only obscure consciousness, and so should not be
eliminated as valueless. It can also serve in this way as a vehicle of realisation, by
disciplining it and opening it up to the illuminating grace that clarifies it. Thus, radiant
and clear, that is, transparent to the Light of consciousness, thought, freed of its

obscuring confinement, rises to the thought of the identity with Śiva and the world, be it
terrible or wonderful, His thought creates.

TANTRĀLOKA

3TTG: TWGḺ̄TI'ī
J TfTTIcT : I ` I
caturṣv eva vikalpeṣu yaḥ saṁskāraḥ kramād asau |
asphuṭaḥ sphuṭatābhāvī prasphuṭan sphuṭitātmakaḥ || 4 II
The (degree of) purity of these four thought constructs is,

progressively,

1) unclear

(asphuṭa),

2)

about

to

become

clear

(sphuṭatābhāvin), 3) in the process of becoming clear (prasphuṭan), and 4)
clear (sphuṭita).
(Notions concerning the true nature of things are) ‘progressivelyʼ,

according to the degree of the excellence of (one’s) practice (abhyāsa), ‘about
to become clearʼ, that is, fit to become clear (and correct), ‘in the process of

becoming clearʼ, that is, (their) clarity is developing, and ‘clear’ʼ, that is, have
attained a state of clarity. Thus here (in this case), (the clarity of the correct

conception of reality) accords with (the progressive) excellence of insight
(darśana); (thus, although the succeeding notions become progressively more
lucid, the preceding ones are) not useless, nor does that compromise (hāni)
(their) siṃilarity, because no other insight (into the nature of reality) (pratyaya)
arises which is dissimilar (to the notion formed of it on the basis of the highest
teachings).” Thus, what is being said in this way is that the purification that

takes place initially develops according to the excellence of (one’s) practice.

Is not (complete) purification of (thought) possible by only just this

much? (With this question in mind,) he thus says:
aE Taš EḷEcs ajã̃ Tāq

tataḥ sphuṭataro yāvad ante sphuṭatamo bhavet |
Then (at the next higher level, the notion one has of reality)
becomes 5) more clear (sphuṭatara) until it finally becomes 6) supremely
(sphuṭatama) so. (5ab)

‘“Then’ (at the next higher level), after the fourth (degree of clarity).
' This means is based on repeated practice (abhyāsa), and so can be contrasted with the

Divine Means (Śāmbhavaopāya), in which the highest state of divine, subjective
consciousness is attained with just one application of self-awareness, and even more s0,

with No Means (Anupāya), which is the spontaneous awareness consciousness has of

itself. But although these two appear to be extreme opposites, in fact, all the means to
realisation ultimately lead to No Means, preparing for its realization.

' Indeed, the opposite takes place — as correct notions of reality become progressively
clearer, they develop into a direct experience of it, which confirms that they are correct,
thus contributing to their clarity. In other words, the essential similarity of true notions
of the nature of reality that develop in this way is based on the fact that they are correct
and grounded in a direct experience which underlies and sustains them, namely, that
they are ultimately products of Śiva consciousness, not just the mind.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Surely (one may ask,) even by means of the most excellent practice,
how can an initially unclear notion rapidly assume the state of one that is about

to become clear, and so on? With this doubt in mind, he says:

I .. 1A

asphuṭādau vikalpe ca bhedo ‘py asty āntarālikaḥ lI 5 II
In (between all these six stages,) starting from (the first, in which)

the notion (vikalpa) (of the nature of reality is) unclear, there are other

intermediate (gradations). (Ścd)

(There are) ‘other” particular ‘intermediate’ (gradations) in between

(each stage). In this way, in between (the initial stage in which the correct

notion is) ‘unclear” and (the one that is) ‘about to become clearʼ, the (initial)

lack of clarity is ‘(in the process of) decreasing (bhraśyadasphuṭatva). In the

same way, (the next intermediate stage) is ‘a little clarity’ (īṣarprasphuṭatva)

(between the stages in which the correct notion of reality is ‘about to become

clear’ and ‘in the process of becoming clear’). (Then, between ‘the process of
becoming clear” and ‘clear’, the intermediate stage is) ‘clarity which is (just)
sprouting (aṅkuritasphuṭatva). (The intermediate stage between ‘clear’ and
‘more clear’) is ‘the indication of greater clarity (āsātritasphuṭataratva).

(Finally, the one between ‘more clear’ and ‘supremely clear” is) ‘emergent
supreme clarity’ (udgacchatsphuṭatamatva).
Surely (one may ask,) once this has been done in this way, what of it?

With this doubt in mind, he says:


hGĀA
TAEIGIGITAĒĒIai1ṈI

tataḥ sphuṭatamodāratādrūpyaparibṛṁhitā

saṁvid abhyeti vimalām avikalpasvarūpatām || 6 l
“Thus (as a result of this process), consciousness, strengthened by

that noble and supremely clear nature (of the most lucid notion), attains (its
own) pure state of being, which is free of thought constructs.
‘Thus’, because of the purification (which takes place) as described,

‘ṭhat nature’ (of consciousness) which is (engaged in) thought (vikalpakatva)

is ‘supremely clear” and therefore ‘noble’, that is, great, because it is on the
same level as (consciousness, which is) free of thought constructs.
‘Strengthened’ by it, and having been freed of the need of further purification,
the form of consciousness consisting of thought constructs (vikalparāpā saṅvit)

' Jayaratha refersin TĀv ad 1/171 to this passage, which extends up to here from verse

This verse is quoted belowin TĀv ad 5/5.
'° This is possible because there is a continuity between thought (vikalpa) and the

consciousness free of it that precedes it. See preceding notes and also above, note 3,87.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘aṭṭains (its own) pure state of being, which is free of thought constructs’ by
the removal of the stain of limitation (sarṁkoca). The meaning is that is shines

radiantly as full (and perfect) knowledge (jñāna) (of reality), free of thought

constructs. Thus, this (verse) also says (in this way) that one should not rest in
just thought constructs alone. As they say:
‘A. wise man should not immerse (himself in any notions) — even

thought that concerns ultimate reality. What difference is there between an

auspicious and an inauspicious thought? (They are both equally just notions).”
He (now) relates this to the main point (he is making).

SJJĪṬ AṬT fĒīryīāī SīATT TTHGREISHĀTT || 9 1
ataś ca bhairavīyaṁ yat tejaḥ saṁvitsvabhāvakam ḷ
' This verse is also quoted above ad 1/24. We have had occasion to note several times

that consciousness is of two kinds, that is, consciousness with thought constructs
(vikalpasaṁvid) and consciousness devoid of them (avikalpasaṁvid). The former is
necessarily limited, conditioned by the relative distinctions between the things that

conceptual representation is based on. The latter, devoid of them, is ‘pure’ in the sense
that, free of all relative distinctions, both internal with regards to what manifests within
it, and external with regards to the possibility of some other reality distinct from it,

consciousness is all that exists. The finite experience of daily life requires both these
aspects. In actual fact, they work together and are not in conflict. However, those who
fail to recognise the integrity of consciousness are generally obsessed with that aspect of
it which is engaged in thought, and the conditioning, limitation and consequent suffering

it entails, and a few, on the contrary, are obsessed with the notion that only

consciousness free of thought is of value. Thus, it is necessary to uncover the other

aspect of consciousness free of thought constructs in order to be free of them, and at the
same time realise their oneness with consciousness.
Although thought constructs obscure ‘pure consciousness, they arise in order

to understand what is perceived directly in the domain of the other aspect of
consciousness, and so are useful, indeed, necessary. However, they entail a split, as it

were, within consciousness, between the perceiver and the perceived. The flux of
perception that connects them is actually the whole of consciousness, when it is ‘pure’
and there is no split. Otherwise, moving between the polarities of subject and object, it

develops into thought constructs after the initial direct perception consciousness has of
itself as manifesting as all things. Accordingly, two aspects of consciousness are
distinguished as ‘pure’, direct perception on the one hand, and conceptual on the other.

The former includes the latter, whereas as the latter excludes the former. Thus, in order
to recognise the original pristine condition, thought-centred consciousness is ‘purified’
by focusing on the other aspect, which is free of thought. Those who practice the

Empowered Means do this by developing thoughts that are in conformity with the

nature of consciousness and hence reality, by attentive reflection and application of

these teachings, until ultimately thought reverts to its true essential, pure conscious
nature. This does not mean that all thought ceases. Rather, thought thus purified not
only ceases to obscure consciousness; it also contributes to its illumination. The yogi
moves freely from savikalpa to nirvikalpa consciousness and back, radiant with the

grace of Bhairava, that is, Supreme Śiva, who is his true nature.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


bhūyo bhūyo vimṛśatāṁ jāyate tatsphuṭātmatā || 7 ||

And thus (for this reason), Bhairava’s radiant power (tejas), which
is consciousness, becomes (fully) clear (and evident) to those who reflect
upon it again and again.
‘Thus’, because consciousness with thought constructs (vikalpasaṁvit)

manifests radiantly as consciousness free of thought constructs (avikalpasaṁvit)
by the power of each particular (level of) purification. Those great souls who,
endowed with the most intense descent of the power (of grace), ‘reflect again
and again’, progressively, (proceeding) from unclear (notions) right up to the
attainment of the state of emergent supreme clarity, on (the pure) ‘’
(consciousness) which is ‘Bhairava’s radiant power (tejas), which is
consciousnessʼ called knowledge and action, the object of their reflective
awareness, namely, the radiant power of Bhairava’s conscious nature, becomes

(supremely) clear (and evident). The meaning is that by the power of Śāmbhava

penetration (into pure Śiva consciousness), that is experienced directly.
Surely (one may ask,) as the sole nature of consciousness is the subject,
it is logical that (consciousness) should be (the subject) who reflects not the
object of (that) reflective awareness; if it were to be so, would it not entail (the
undesirable consequence) that it would be insentient as is (any object) such as

(the colour) ‘blue’? With this doubt in mind, he presents (the problem):

The Lord Conceals and Reveals His Own Nature

E EḶETEEATĀĀFHEAEĪĪEEKTḤI

nanu ṣaṁvit parāmraṣṭrī parāmarśamayṝī svataḥ |
parāmr̥śyā kathaṁ tāthārūpyasṛṣṭau tu sā jaḍā || 8 II
Śurely, (someone may object that this cognitive) consciousness
(saṁvid) is a reflecting perceiver that is itself (svataḥ) (intrinsically and
spontaneously) reflective awareness. How can it be an object of awareness?
If it were to be emitted in that form (it would be) insentient (not

consciousness).

‘In that formʼ means as the object of awareness. He (now) replies to

that (objection).

īī fktzīzzafzii
u <u
' Sanderson translates: “Surely consciousness is itself awareness. It is that which carries

out acts of representation. How then, could it be itself the object of such representation?
If it were to assume such a character it would no longer be consciousness.”

TANTRĀLOKA

ucyate svātmasaṁvittiḥ svabhāvād eva nirbharā |

nāsyām apāsyaṁ nādheyaṁ kiñcid ity uditaṁ purā || 9 ||
'(In reply to this objection,) it is said that consciousness, which is

one’s own (authentic) self (svātmasaṁpvitti), is by its very nature full (of all
things) (nirbharā). It was said before that there is nothing at all that needs

be subtracted from it or added to it.

Here (according to us), consciousness (sarṁvid) is the form of one’s own
(authentic) self (svātmarūpā) because there is nothing separate from it on which
it depends. It is (spontaneously) by itself (svataḥ) full (of all things)ʼ, that is to

say, it craves for nothing else. Thus, because it is ever manifest (nityodita),

‘there is nothing at all within’ consciousness, which is one’s own (authentic)
self, (that could be) ‘unclear’ etc., that ‘needs be removed’ʼ or that is

‘supremely clear” etc. that (needs be) ‘added to it’. It was said ‘before’ in the

chapter concerning No Means that:

‘(No practice) associated with action (kriyāyoga) can serve there as a

means (to realisation).”

Thus, with that same intended sense, it is said by (others) also who are

outside (our tradition):

‘Thuṣ, there is nothing that is to be removed and nothing that needs be

added. What needs to be seen arises from what exists (bhūtatā). He who sees

what exists is liberated.”

Surely (one may ask,) if this is the case, how is it that this ‘unclear” etc.

unfolding expansion of consciousness (arises)? With this doubt in mind, he
says:

'“ Sanderson: ‘To this we answer as follows. The consciousness which is our identity is

all-containing by its very nature. We have already said that nothing can be subtracted

from it nor anything added to it.”
Consciousness, which is essentially subjective, is initially known objectively as the
goal — ultimate reality, Deity, one’s own nature etc. But even so, it is not degraded

thereby to the level of a common object. Even when making itself known to the
individual fettered soul in this way, it does not change. The process through which the

individual comes to realise that this fundamental divine consciousness, which is at once
all things and beyond them, makes no difference to it at all. Developing insight is not a

matter of removing limitation, impurity, ignorance or the like from consciousness. Nor

does anything need to be added to it, nor could it be. Full to overflowing with all things,

it lacks nothing, and, perfect in all respects, it is free of all defects that could possibly

require removal or remedy.

Above, 2/8ab, see there. Also quoted ad 3/271cd-272ab (271).
Read tadabhiprāyeṇaiva for yadabhiprāyeṇaiva.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


fēā ] gdechlāīcaārrg-āīrairaāit |
ĪTHTJBĪGTGHGTĪTTSTTTHAT: || Q0 |
kiṁ tu durghaṭakāritvāt svācchandyān nirmalād asau |
svātmapracchādanakrīḍāpaṇḍitaḥ parameśvaraḥ || 10 ||

”However, by

virtue of His unsullied

freedom, which can

accomplish the impossible, the Supreme Lord is adept in (playing) the

game of concealing His own nature.

‘However, the Supreme Lord’, Who is the Supreme Light, ‘can
accomplish the impossible’, that is, hide His own nature. Thus, because of this,

Sanderson: ‘Yet by virtue of that absolute freedom which is his power to accomplish
the impossible the supreme lord is adept in the game of self-concealment.”

The expression durghaṭakārin literally means ‘one who can do what is very difficult
(to do)ʼ.

This verse is quoted in the Mahārthamañjari (p. 51), where Maheśvarānanda explains

it as follows. yady api asau śaktipātādyabhāvāt kumbhakārasyāpi ghatakaraṇe
sarvaśaktiśivātmatā,
tadaparijñānāt
tu
kumbhakāratety

iti

padasaṅgatiprakriyayā svahr̥dayena (p. 50) parameśvarībhāvaparāmarśaśūnyo

bhavati, tathāpi tatvadrṣṭyā tasya parameśvaratvam āmnāyodghoṣitam avarjanīyam |
tathāh
parameśvarasya
hy
ayam
evāsādhāraṇasvabhāvo
yat
_sarvadā
srṣṭyādipañcakṛtyakāritvam | tac cottaratra vyaktam ālocayiṣyate | etad anaṅgīkārād
dhi māyāvedāntādinirṇītasyātmanaḥ svasphuraṇāmodamāndyalakṣaṇam asatkalpatvam āpatitam | puṟuṣaś cāyaṁ

kintu durghatakāritvāt svācchandyānnirmalādasau )

svātmapracchādanakṛīdāpaṇḍitaḥ parameśvaraḥ || TĀ 4/10

iti śrītantrālokasthityā māyāpathāvatīrṇo 'pi parameśvaravat sarvadā pañcāpi kr̥tyāni
karoṭi | yato ʻsya na kasyāñcid apy avasthāyāṁ saṅvitsaṁskāravandhyatvam ḷ

‘Even a potter who (is engaged) in making a pot possesses Śiva’s nature with
all its powers. However, because no descent of the power (of the grace) etc. has taken

place, he does not know that fully, and so his condition is that of a potter. Thus, due to
his own heart (of reflective awareness) that functions in accord with (his) level, he is
devoid of the reflective awareness of (his essential) state of identity with the Supreme

Lord. (p. 50) But even so, from the point of view of reality, his (identity) with the
Supreme Lord, proclaimed by the tradition, cannot be set aside. Such is the Supreme
Lord's unique nature, namely, that he always performs the five functions of creation etc.

This will be examined clearly further ahead. It is because of Māyā that Vedānta and the

like have not accepted this (teaching) that that which is the pulsing radiance and joy (of
consciousness) has become as if unreal, the characteristic of which is blindness. Again,

although this individual soul has descended down onto the path of Māyā, like the
Supreme Lord he always performs (all) the five functions. This is because, in accord
with the view of the venerable Tantrāloka (as stated in this verse), he is not devoid of a

trace
of
MM p. 49-50.

consciousness

in

any

state

at

all..

Kṣemarāja analyses in detail in the Spandasaṁdoha (p. 10-14) how every

perceiver performs in a limited way Śiva’s five functions of creation, maintenance,
withdrawal,
grace
and
See Dyczkowski 1992a: 65-67.

obscuration

in

each

act

of

perception.

TANTRĀLOKA

which is (His) pure ‘freedom’ʼ, He conceals ‘His own nature’, which is the

supreme subject alone (and nothing else), by the outpouring (of countless

individual) subjects and objects etc. and manifesting in that way. That is (His)
‘gameʼ, that is, (His) activity (pravṛtti), which takes place without (His)

contemplating (any) particular pre-determined result, in which (He is) ‘adept’
and skilled. This is the meaning. This alone is His power called Māyā, which is
His freedom. It makes His own nature manifest as concealed (āvṛta), although it

is (always) unconcealed (anāvṛta), due to which this manifestation of duality
(and relative distinctions) (bheda), consisting of subjects and objects etc., is so
(extensive).

He says that (in the next verse):


fārī: |

I| 22 I|
anāvṛte svarūpe ‘pi yad ātmācchādanaṁ vibhoḥ |
saiva māyā yato bheda etāvān viśvavrttikaḥ || 11 ||

Although the All-pervasive Lord’s own nature is (always)

unconcealed, yet He conceals himself. That (concealment) is itself Māyā,

from which (proceeds) such duality (and diversity) (bheda) that is active

everywhere (viśvavṛttika).

(The Lord’s) manifestation in this way as all things is what is said to be

duality. It is due to that that this bondage of transmigratory existence, the end of
which is far away (and hard to attain, exists). In order to remove that, (one
should exercise) this reflective awareness so that consciousness itself,
repeatedly contemplated (in this way), may become clearly evident.

He says that (in the following verse):


TJTITHTTT
ZTTḤ HRTYT: |

TaATITT-ĀTT ṬTHTĪTĒTT

22 1

tathābhāsanam evāsya dvaitam uktaṁ maheśituḥ |
taddvayāpāsanaivāyaṁ parāmarśo ‘bhidhīyate || 12 ||

Sanderson: ‘The actual nature of the all-pervading Lord is not concealed. Yet he
seems to conceal himself. It is this self-concealment that is (meant by) māyā, the source

of all this diversity which is active everywhere.

Read with MS C, anāvṛte for anāvṛtte (which is, anyway, incorrect). In place of

yadātmācchādanaṁ, ‘namely, the cover (which conceals) His own natureʼ, MS C reads:
yasmād ācchādanaṁ. Adopting this reading, this line could be translated thus: ‘Māyā is
that due to which a cover (exists that conceals) (the All-pervasive Lord, although His
nature is (always) unconcealed).”

Cf. ŚDr 1/32cd: ātmapracchādanakrīḍāṁ kurvato vā kathaṁcana māyārīpam — Or
else Māyā accomplishes in some (miraculous) way the game of self-concealment.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Duality is said to be the manifestation of this Great Lord in this
way. The removal of that duality is said to be this reflective awareness

(that this is s0).

‘The removal of that duality° takes place by attending to the

(essential) oneness (abheda) of the effect and (its) cause (that is, universal
manifestation and Lord Śiva).

Surely (one may ask,) everybody here agrees that what is manifest is

not unmanifestand that this body, (the colour) blue and the rest manifest as
different (from one other) (bhedena). So how is it that it is said that: ‘the

manifestation of consciousness itself (takes place) by removing that’? In order
to (answer this question and) remedy this doubt, after (having discussed) the
purification of thought constructs, he commences (his exposition of) the nature

of sound discriminative reasoning (tarkatattva), announced in the initial

enunciation (of topics of the Tantrāloka).

The True Nature of Sound Reasoning (tarkatattva)
In place of taddvayāpāsanenāyaṁ — by the removal of that duality this . . .’ read with

MSs C and Ch, and apparently Jayaratha himself, taddvayāpāsanaivāyaṁ — ‘The
removal of that duality is itself this . . .

The form of reflective awareness in the sphere of the Divine Means, where the

oneness of consciousness prevails, is the pure all-encompassing awareness of ‘I’. The
sphere of the Empowered Means is that of both unity and duality. The same freedom
which is the reflective awareness of the oneness of subjectivity, free of thought
constructs, also operates as dichotomizing Māyā, that generates the duality of

objectivity, and with it the notions that accompany and sustain it. At this level, there is a
choice to be made between one or the other. This is the form of reflective awareness that
operates here in order to remove duality. This is the Sound Reasoning (sattarka) that is
examined in the following section.

The same expression appears above TĀv ad 3/21-22, 323, 5/155cd-156ab (5/154cd155ab), 9/159 and 28/355b. See note to TĀv ad 3/21-22.

One could as translate that they manifest ‘as duality or ‘as division’, that is, as the
relative distinction between things that constitutes duality.
The term tarka is here translated as ‘sound disceming and intuitive reasoning’, in

accord with Abhinavagupta’s usage of the term. It has a variety of meanings and

applications in the various schools of Indian philosophy. The conimon basic meaning of
the word ‘tarka’ is simply reasoning applied to discover the nature of something. Nyāya

is the school of Indian philosophy that prides itself especially in the application of
reason in this way. It is defined in the Nyāyasūtra, one of its earliest texts, as
avijñātatatve ʻrthe kāraṇopapattitas tattvajñānārtham ūhas tarkaḥ- ‘Tarka is reasoning
(applied) in order to (gain) correct knowledge of something when its true nature
unknown; it is the ascertainment of the causes (for its correct apprehension).’ (NS
1/1/40 quoted in SvTu ad 10/678ab). Nyāya (which itself means ‘sound reasoning’) is
the discipline of applying sound reasoning (tarkaśāstra). It lays down the criteria for
sound and unsound reasoning and the rules that should govern formal philosophical
debate with an opponent of a rival school. The latter’s view is stated first as the ‘initial
view (pūrvapakṣa). It is then confronted with the ‘subsequent view’ (uttarapakṣa),
which is the response (urtara) to it. The debate swings back and forth in this way until
the ultimate conclusion (siddhānta) is reached, which proves and establishes one’s own
position. Tarka can be seen to be just ‘dry logic’ (śuṣkatarka), especially if focused on

TANTRĀLOKA

r̥̄á -r-ṁ hlãr. |

JTAGT āTh-R̥JRJĪR
fFēTT: ] 23 1|
durbhedapādapasyāsya mūlaṁ kṛntanti kovidāḥ |
dhārārūḍhena sattarkakuṭhāreṇeti niścayaḥ || 13 II

t is certain (niścaya) that the learned sever the root of this tree

of harmful duality (durbheda) (which is hard to fell (durbheda)) with the

epistemological matters or formal logic, not metaphysics. This Tarka is quite the

opposite. It is sattarka — sound or true reasoning focused on the highest reality and truth

— sat in the highest sense. A Śivasūtra (1/18) declares that vitarka ātmajñānam — ‘right

discernment is the knowledge of the Self’. Bhāskara comments from the point of view

of the Pratyabhijñā:
‘The discriminating insight which (operates) in the midst of (the many and)
diverse limiting conditions (upādhi) is the right discernment of the single uninterrupted
awareness (vimarśa) of one’s own true nature (svasvabhāva), which serves to attain the
recognitive insight (pratyabhijīñā) that the Self is Śiva. Know this to be the higheṣt
means to realisation, in which one experiences the true Self (satyātman) directly.
Therefore, (this is) the supreme unfolding of the intuitive awareness of the pure Self.’
Commenting on the same aphorism, Kṣemarāja simply writes: ‘Right

discernment is to deliberate that: ‘I am Śiva Who is all things’. This is one’s knowledge
of the Self.”

Grounded in the developing contemplation (bhāvanā) of reality mediated by a
sound discernment between the view to adopt and the one to reject, Sound Reasoning is
the reverse of Māyā, which is the application of the freedom of consciousness that

induces the error of duality and hence the stream of conceptualization. Sound Reasoning

is the application of that same freedom that grasps the truth of oneness. Subject and

object, perceiver and perceived persist, but not separately. t is the unfolding insight that

knows that the perceiver is the perceived and the perceived is the perceiver. This is the
experience of Pure Knowledge (sśuddhavidyā), the first of the five ‘pure’ reality levels
(śuddhatattva), on which consciousness is not sullied by dichotomizing thought
constructs. It is the unfolding discriminating insight that accompanies the purification of
dualistic notions, and fuels the expansion of consciousness (vikāsa) that encompasses

the lower reality principles, that are the domain of Māyā, recognizing them to be

manifestations of the subjectivity of consciousness.
The classic formulation of the experience at this level is the insight that ‘ am
this’ (aham idam) and ‘this am I’ (idam aham), in which there is a common base
(sāmānyadhikaraṇya) of consciousness on which subject (‘I') and object (‘this’) rest,
equally balanced as aspects of the same consciousness, like ‘the evenly weighted scales
of a balance’. Sattarka has thus also been translated as ‘insight’. This is clearly a good
and correct translation. However, by ignoring the literal, common meaning of the word,

an important aspect of sartarka is ignored, namely, that it is also the process of the
‘purification of thought’ that culminates in the insight which sustains it and underlies it.

It also ignores the two-fold quality of thought and consciousness, namely, that they are

both thought and its absence, confusion, approximation, limitation and duality as well as

certainty, exactitude, freedom and oneness. Where it not so there would be no

possibility of thought, reason or insight.
Cf. ‘when duality is destroyed by masses of sharp reasoning, just like a tree that is
felled by a sharp axe, (reasoning) that is tempered by real knowledge (as an axe is
tempered by fire,) it does not grow again.’ MVV 1/229. Cf. below, 4/80-81ab.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


fully sharpened (dhārārūḍha) axe of sound discerning reasoning (sattarka)
(that has attained the highest level).

This ‘duality” consisting of subject and object etc. is the sole cause of
bondage and s0 is ‘harmful’. Itis (like) a tree because it is hard to uproot. The
‘wise’, who have recognized their own (true Śiva) nature, (possess this sound

intuitive reason and so uproot it). Itis ‘sound’ (sar), thatis, establishedin (the

one) reality (tattva), which (for them) is directly apparent (sākṣāt). Thus,

different from other (lower forms of) reasoning, (what is meant here by)

‘intuitive reasoning’ is the one that has attained the supreme eminence (koṭi)
(of insight). Emerging from the intellect sanctified by (its) contact (sparsśa) with
the aspect (of consciousness) which is Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyā), its
supreme form brings about the recognition of one’s own (true) nature. That is

the well sharpened ‘axe’ of this (tree), which is experienced (in this way) by
means of which (the wise) ‘sever the root’ cause (of duality), which is

ignorance (akhyāti), in such a way that this (tree which is the) ignorance of full

(all-encompassing) and supreme pure consciousness may not arise again.
This is the teaching (concerning sound discriminative reasoning). It purifies the
notions (vikalpa) of great souls in accord with the excellence of their practice
(of insight) by examining (the true nature of) the body and the rest (of the
psychophysical organism, wrongly identified with the Self, in the light of the
The acquisition of knowledge, whether through direct perception, inference,

authoritative testimony or any other valid means of knowledge, takes place in stages.
The final one is termed ‘niścaya’, which can be translated as ‘ascertainment’, ‘decision’

or ‘conviction’, according to whether the process of ‘coming to know’ is understood to

be one of choosing between alternative possibilities or, what amounts to the same thing,

eradication of doubt.

The expression ‘dhārārūḍha-’ means both fully sharpenedʼ and ‘mounted on (the
highest) levelʼ. The first meaning qualifies ‘axe’ and the second this intuitive insight.

Read sat for san.

The word sat is thus fancifully derived from sakṣar (‘directly apparent’) and tattva
(‘reality”).

Śuddha Vidyā is the experience of entry into the Pure Principles above the duality of
Māyā. It is a state of consciousness of oneness free of thought constructs ~ vikalpa. The

experience has two aspects. One is that “all this universe is me” and the other is “T am

all this universe”. They correspond to the principles of Īśvara and Sadāśiva beyond it.

One may wonder why there need be these two beyond, when they combine in Śuddha
Vidyā. The answer, according to Swami Lakshmanjoo, is that Suddha Vidyā is not
stable. There is entry and exit from it into the duality of Māyā in the domain of thought
constructs just below it. Thus, further ascent is not so much a matter of an evolving

experience as one thatis marked by growing stability of insight. Understanding sattarka
to be Śuddha Vidyāis thus a way of expressing that, although sartarka moves into the
realms of nondual consciousness beyond Māyā, until it is fully perfected it repeatedly
falls back into Māyā to then rise out of it again. In this way, the domain of vikalpa
gradually purified by increasing absorption into nirvikalpa until, when Śuddha Vidyā

reaches its supreme form, that is, its completely stable form, fully immersed in

nirvikalpa, the recognition of one’s own true identity as Śiva flashes forth so perfectly
and completely that it need not do so again.

Read with MS Jh: —saṅvinmātrākhyāteḥ for -saṁvinmātrakhyāteḥ.

“ Ṭṛees that are not cut down from the root may grow again.

TANTRĀLOKA

teachings). Once it has reached (its) supreme summit, it assumes the nature of
contemplation (bhāvanā), by virtue of which the nature of consciousness,

aḹthough (initially) unclear, attains a state of (perfect) clarity.

Thus, he says:


āī- īaTTHTg: TāTRTTGHI 3HT: |

I 2 II
tām enāṁ bhāvanām āhuḥ sarvakāmadughāṁ budhāḥ |
sphuṭayed vastu yāpetaṁ manorathapadād api || 14 |

The wise call that (intuitive reason) creative contemplation
(bhāvanā), the cow who grants all wishes. It renders (that) reality (vastu)
which is beyond even (the most) wishful (imagination) vividly evident.

(Sound intuitive) reasoning is ‘that’

which they call

‘creative

contemplation’. (Common logical) reasoning (tarka) is (the process) of

reaching a conclusion (concerning the nature of something) on the basis of
available evidence (liṅga). (When that) has reached (its) supreme summit, it is

“Bhāvanā’ literally means ‘causing to be’. It is a state of creative contemplation
attained through concentration, at the end of which the contemplated object, whether
externally existent or imagined, appears before the yogi as if present and fully evident

(see SpN p. 27). If it is directed at the fundamental state of subjective consciousness free
of thought constructs (nirvikalpa), it empties consciousness of its contents, as it were, as
the yogi lays hold of his higher subjective Śiva nature, fusing with its Emptiness. In this
way the yogi who seeks liberation attains, by means of bhāvanā, direct understanding of

the true purport of the scriptures, that is, knowledge of the highest reality, which is

‘beyond the plane of desire’. See also below, 28/346cd-349ab.
! Abhinava is referring here to Kāmadhenu, also known as Surabhi, the divine cow
(dhenu), believed to be the mother of all cows, who are her earthly embodiments. She is
a miraculous ‘cow of plenty° whose milk fulfils every desire (kāma). Iconographically,
she is generally depicted as a white cow with a human female head and breasts, or as a

white cow containing various deities within her body. Below, in 13/156, the same
analogy is applied to pratibhā, the creative, intuitive genius of consciousness, which is
its capacity to understand profoundly and imagine. Poets and sages shine with pratibhā.
It is also because of that that we can understand and use language, reason, and
experience beauty. Even animals possess it to some limited degree. The birds know
when it is time to migrate, and lions have a sense of their strength. In its most developed
form, it is the creative genius of Bhairava who, independently of any means, creates the
world (3/65cd-66ab). The practice of bhāvanā in the domain of the Empowered Means

serves to progressively strengthen it as Śiva’s grace becomes progressively more
intense.

Lit. ‘which has departed from the path of desireʼ.

Read abhidhīyamānaliṅgānuvedhaḥ for vidhīyamānaliṅgānuvedhaḥ. The emended

reading literally means ‘penetration into the sign (liṅga) which is being denoted (by the
teaching)ʼ. The word ‘liṅga’ is a term commonly used in logic. In that context it denotes
the ‘sign’ or ‘evidence’ on the basis of which inference is possible. For example, smoke
on a hill is a ‘sign’ or ‘evidence’ that a fire is burning there. The scriptures or a teacherʼs

oral instruction voices ‘signs or ‘evidence’ of the existence of an ultimate reality.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


said to be creative contemplation (bhāvanā). That is said (in the following line):

‘that itself is supreme knowledge which is considered to be creative
contemplation’. Thus ‘this’ (creative contemplation) is the act of expounding
(kathana) that (teaching concerning sound discriminative reasoning) in accord

with (the teacher’s) command (ādeśa). When (that contemplation) becomes

fully developed, one obtains the desired fruit, and so he says (that this
contemplation is) ‘the cow who grants all wishes’. That is said (in the
following verse):

‘Present there for just one (auspicious) moment (nuhūrta), he attains

(perfect) contemplative absorption (samādhi), and there also, when it is well

completed, he attains the desired fruit.

(That) ‘reality’, which is ultimately real consciousness, whose unique
characteristic is (its identity as) the supreme subject, is (s0 wonderful that it is)
‘beyond (the most) wishful (imagination)ʼ. It is not in the sphere of even free
(unhampered) thoughts (svatantravikalpa), because it cannot be (conceived) by

thought. That contemplation (bhāvanā) alone ‘renders (it) evident’; that is, can

make it directly apparent (sākṣāt) by (its) condition (vṛtri), free of thought
(avikalpa). What can the yogi not accomplish by its glorious power?
Thus, this itself is said in our teaching (darśana) to be the most
excellent limb of Yoga. Accordingly, he says:

ṜTIIGĪHHTTTITTT TT:JJTHTT I QU, I

īt 3ka; kri 3sĩ̃ vrṣar |
ÉEĀEEPHCEIETṬGGEUŪĀIKCI

‘Penetration’ into that which this ‘sign’ or ‘evidence’ indicates is the realisation of its

truth by becoming one with it, that is, recognizing one’s own essential identity with it.
MV 17/20cd. The previous line says tadarthabhāvanayuktaṁ mano dhyānam
udāhṭam ḷ| It is said that the mind that is engaged in the creative contemplation of that

reality (arthabhāvanā) is meditation (dhyāna).’ This verse defines dhyāna, which is the
fourth ancillary of the Yoga of Six Ancillares (ṣaḍaṅgayoga), taught in chapter

seventeen of the MV (verses 1-24). It comes just after Tarka, as its highest level. This

then, when it is fully developed, turns into samādhi — contemplative absorption — which

is defined in the verse that Jayaratha goes on to quote. Concerning the translation of the

term ‘yogāṅga as ‘ancillary of Yoga’ rather than ‘limb of Yoga’ as is commonly done.

see below, note 4,50.
The word ‘kathana’ literally means ‘telling’ or ‘explaining’. In the context of the
Krama teachings, ‘kathana’ denotes the imparting of a realised state of consciousness

through the teacher’s word. Just as consciousness expands by ‘siddhadarśana’ ‘seeing a
fully realised teacherʼ, it may do so also by hearing his words and profoundly

experiencing the reality to which they refer. See above, note on 2/2.

TMV 17/21. CĒMV 18/16 ‘Abiding for a moment (muhūrta) (thus), he attains the Lord
of the gods. Penetrated (by the power of the deity), he sees all things (shining with a
light) equal to the brilliance of millions of suns.”

TANTRĀLOKA

śrīpūrvaśāstre tat proktaṁ tarko yogāṅgam uttamam |
heyādyālocanāt tasmāt tatra yatnaḥ praśasyate || 15 ||
mārge cetaḥ sthirībhūtaṁ heye ‘pi viṣayecchayā |

prerya tenānayet tāvad yāvat padam anāmayam || 16 ||
It said

in

the

scripture

(called)

Śrīpārva that

“(sound

discriminating) reasoning (tarka) is the most excellent ancillary° of Yoga
Abhinava is referring here (4/15-16) to chapter seventeen (verses 1-24) of the MV,
that teaches Saḍaṅga Yoga. It has been studied in detail by Vasudeva (2004), referring

to cognate Siddhānta sources, especially the Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha, from which
the MV draws extensively. The names given to these stages or ‘ancillaries” or ‘limbs’
(see below, note, 4,50) of this Yoga are common terms found in all forms of yoga, but
as is the case generally, here they denote specific practices which form part of a

partīcular program of practice that develops gradually through these stages
(kramayoga). See below, note 4,53.

Vasudeva points out that it is well known that the number of the limbs of Yoga
taught in the Yogasūtra are eight. However, in the Śaivāgamas they are commonly just
six. The MV is typical in that respect. But its Yoga also has a number of its own
features, including the order in which they are arranged. Thus, there they are 1)
Prāṇāyāma which consists of five types of breath control. 2) Dhārāṇā, which consists
of four meditations centred on navel, heart, palate, and throat. 3) Tarka. 4) Dhyāna.
5) Samādhi, and 6) Pratyāhāra, that is, the withdrawal of the senses from their objects.
Although Abhinavagupta devotes the whole of Chapter Six to the movement of the vital

breath (prāṇacara) and refers to various forms of it in numerous places, he practically

ignores prāṇāyāma as a technique of breath control. Although the practice in Chapter

Seven does implicitly entail breath control in conjunction with the recitation of Mantra,

he did not approve of it as such (cf. below 4/87-91). He also has no interest in the

pratyāhāra taught in the MV. In Patañjali’s system, the withdrawal of the senses from

their objects heralds a series of stages of concentration. Samādhi in his system is perfect
concentration, and so is the last of the series. These stages are typically in a comparable
order of succession in many other forms of Yoga praxis. It is very unusual to find
pratyāhāra at the end of the series. In the context of the praxis taught in the MV

however, it makes sense. There it is described as follows: ‘Having as if died, (the yogi)

is not moved (from his inner absorption) even by (the most) intense sound and other

(objects of sense). (Such a) yogi is the delight of the Yoginīkula. Having thus by means

of this procedure withdrawn (his) mind repeatedly (from the objects of sense), the yogi

should practice breath control and the rest in order to attain success in yoga.’ (23-24)

The MV then goes on to teach a method of ritual suicide (utkrānti). This

subject is taken up by Abhinava, who quotes this passage from the MV (see 19/54cd ff.,
with reference to MV 17/25-27). However, he treats it quite separately from the yoga
praxis, whereas, although certainly a change of subject in the MV, it is not irrelevant.

Again, Abhinava does not even mention samādhi, for it is hardly more than the
culmination or fruit of dhyāna, that precedes it.

This leaves Tarka and dhyāna which, as understood in the MV, are closely
associated. This association is reflected in Abhinava’s presentation of Sattarka as the

cornerstone of the cognitive yoga of Śāktopāya. He is so centrally focused on that, that

he quotes two verses that define it in the MV (17/18-19 in TĀ 4/15-16) fully and

practically literally. Even so, in this passage, Tarka appears to be simply defined as just
the ascertainment of what is to be cultivated and what is to be rejected. Vasudeva
accordingly translates Tarka in that context simply as ‘Judgement’. Dhyāna is the
consequence of that, namely, contemplation (bhāvanā) of the goal and purpose (artha)


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


because it is the (careful) consideration (ālocana) of what must be
abandoned etc. (and what should be adopted). Therefore, it is enjoined that
effort (must be applied) there (to that).

The mind is firmly fixed on (its chosen) path, even though it be one
that should be abandoned, because of (its) desire for (its) object.° Having
been impelled (instead) by that (sound discriminative reasoning), it should

be led along (by it) until it reaches the (supreme) plane (of consciousness)

free of (all) infirmityʼ. (15-16)
(It is said that):

of that Judgement, which is Śiva. Abhinava refers to these two, and Jayaratha obliges us
by supplying the MV’s definition of samādhi, which is the contemplative absorption
that arises from prolonged meditation (dhyāna/bhāvanā) (MV 17/21, quoted in TĀv ad

4/14).

Here we observe the vigour of Abhinava’s exegetical method. In accord with

his avowed policy that everything taught in the Tantrāloka is taught directly or

implicitly in the MV, in the following passage, from here to verse 18ab, Abhinava refers
us to it. He does this in the context of his exposition of Śāktopāya. The removal of the

ignorance that obscures consciousness is brought about in this category of practice by

the progressive purification of thought that takes place by the development of creative
contemplation (bhāvanā). Although not at all ‘explicitly stated in the MV, he finds
there the scriptural authority justifying his teaching. Thus, the MV also declares that
Tarka leads the mind along to the supreme plane of consciousness, and it bears fruit in
dhyāna, which is creative contemplation (bhāvanā). This Abhinava identifies with the

principle of Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyā) taught in the Pratyabhijñā, and presents it as

the manner in which thought is refined until it tapers off into pure consciousness free of

thought constructs, that recognises itself as all things and all things as itself (aham idam
idam aham), which is the experience of Pure Knowledge (suddhavidyā).
Finally, we may presume, as Jayaratha does, that Abhinava, following the MV.,

accepts the Yoga with six ancillaries. However, Abhinava himself lists the five

prohibitions (yama) and five injunctions (niyama), and along with the other six
ancillaries of classical Patañjali Yoga, defines them much as they are there (4/87 ft.).
Admittedly, however, he lists them to say that they are of no use compared to Sound

Reasoning, which is thus not only the best ancillary of Yoga — in the context of the
practice of the Empowered Meanṣ, it is the only one.

MV 17/18bcd-19. This is a direct quotation. The printed edition of the MV reads
ālocanā for ālocanāt, bhūte for bhūtaṁ, and preryaṁ for prerya. Vasudeva accepts all

the readings found here.

As does Vasudeva (p. 367 n 1), following Sanderson (1992b: Appendix 2), 1 translate
‘yogāṅga’ as ‘ancillary to Yoga rather than, as is common practice, ‘limb of Yoga’.

Cf.: ‘Sanderson has shown that it is this technical use of the term aṅga, denoting a

secondary factor necessary for the accomplishment of the principle derived from the
terminology of the Mīmātṁsā.”

Below, in his introductory remarks to 4/28, Jayaratha explains that the expression

‘desire for the object (of desire) is not to be understood literally. Rather it denotes the

combination of two factors. One is the general sense of craving technically called the

principle of Attachment (rāgatattva). The other is the constraint of previous Karma,
implemented by the principle of Necessity, that focuses that craving onto a particular
goal (see below, 4/17ff.). In this context, ‘the object of desire’ is the form of liberation a

particular school preaches.
Read with MV 17/19c tenānayet for tena nayet.

TANTRĀLOKA

“Breath control, visualization (of deities), meditation (dhyāna),

withdrawal (of the senses) (pratyāhāra), fixing (the attention) (dhāraṇā),

discriminative reasoning (tarka),

and

(perfect) contemplative absorption

(samādhi) is said to be the Yoga with six ancillaries.’

Although according to this teaching (nīti), as an ancillary of Yoga

(sound discriminative) reasoning is the same as breath control and the rest (of
the ancillaries), even so, because it ‘is the careful assessment (ālocana) of

what needs to be abandoned (and what should be adopted)ʼ, it is the
ancillary of Yoga which is ‘the most excellent’, that is, (its most) internal

ancillary. Reflecting by means of (sound discriminative) reasoning that ‘this is
to be abandonedʼ” and ‘this is to be adopted’, the Yogi quickly comes to know
reality. That is said (in the following verse):

This list, in this same sequence, corresponds exactly to the one reported by Vasudeva
as being the one in the Śrīkaṇṭhī. Jayaratha used this text extensivelyin his commentary
on verse 1/18, where it lists the names of the Śaiva scriptures in their various groups.

The Yoga with Six Ancillariesis basic to the Siddhānta. Although the orderin which
they appear is different etc., one essential feature of the great majority is the presence of

Tarka as the ‘most excellent’ of the six. See the introduction to the French translation of

the MĀP (kriyā etc. pādas) concerning the limbs of Yoga according to the

Siddhāntāgamas. Somadeva has surveyed the number and names of the ancillaries of
Yoga in twenty-two texts (2004: 367-382) and drawn up two charts (ibid. p. 339-380)
displaying their layout. The texts are the following. The number of ancillaries of their

respective forms of yoga are given in brackets: Svacchanda (4); Markaṇḍeyapurāṇa,

Sarvajñānottara, and Matsyendrasaṅhitā (4); Śaraṅgadharapaddhati (4); Nyāyabhāṣya
Vāyupurāṇa (5), Jayākhya, Maitrayaṇīya Upaniṣad (6), SŚrīkaṇṭhī (6),
inīvijayottara (6), Svāyambhuva (6), Gorakṣaśataka, Yogamārtaṇḍa, and

(6), Pataīñjali,

Śāradātilaka,

Siddhasiddhāntapaddhati,

Yogayajñavalkya, Īśāna-gurudevapaddhati, Matṣyendrasaṁhitā, Mṛgendrandra and
Netratantra (8).
Six of these texts teach four ancillaries, one five, seven eight, and sixteen six.

There are, however, three texts that teach two different numbers of ancillaries in

different places. Of those that teach six, nine out of twelve are Śaiva. All the
Siddhāntāgamas except one (Mṛgendra) teach six. Moreover, all of them include Tarka

even though they are not all the same. Somadeva notes, ‘lt is this form of yoga that is

commonly referred to as Sadaṅgayoga in Śaiva sources. In the majority of surviving
Śaiva scriptures generally, in which these six auxiliaries are found, there is no consensus

as to their order, their definition or even their subdivisions. Such disagreement reflects
doctrinal divergences in the various Śaiva Tantras and indicates deliberate shifts of
emphasis. It is important to realise that despite their superficial mutual similarities, and
the evident terminological overlap with the Aṣṭaṅgayoga of Patañjali, these systems are
not simply indiscriminate reshuffled versions of an original ‘correct’ order. Many Śaiva

scriptures have invested considerable effort in the reformulation of Yoga. Under deeper

familiarisation, the internal logic of the respective systems proves their coherence.’
Concerning the translation of the term yogāṅga as ancillary of Yoga rather than a

limb, see above, note 4,50.
Cf. MV 17/18ab: yogāṅgatve samāne ‘pi tarko yogāṅgam uttamam | Although

equally an ancillary of Yoga (like the others), (Sound) Reasoning is the best ancillary of

Yoga.”


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

‘(Sound) reasoning (iūha) is the inner ancillary of Yoga, because it is

due to that that (the yogi) is established on the path, and so, although it is on the
same level (sādhāraṇa) (as the other ancillaries), it assists more (than any of the

others do to attain) liberation.”

Similarly:


‘Only he who, by (sound) reasoning not opposed to his own Siddhānta

(svasiddhānta), reflects on the goal (artha) (of life, namely) right conduct
(dharma), knowledge and liberation, knows reality (as it truly is).”

Therefore, one must exert oneself primarily just here (in the practice of
Sound discriminative Reasoning). Thus it is said: “therefore it is taught that
(one’s) effort (should be applied) there (to that).” The yogi who has exerted

himself ‘there’ on ‘a path that ought to be abandoned’ʼ, taught by other
schools (śāstra) such as the Sāṁkhya and characterized (by them) as the means
to liberation, his ‘mind is firmly established’ (there), because the (erroneous)
conceit (abhimāna) has arisen (in his mind) that ‘this truth (attva) which (one)
should ardently desire is mineʼ. ‘Once impelled’ (instead) ‘by that’ (sound

discriminative) reasoning and thus rendered averse to the path which should be

abandoned, (the mind) ‘should be led onwards (by it) and brought to rest on

the path which is to be adopted, ‘until it reaches the (supreme) plane (of
consciousness) free of (all) infirmity’ and manifests radiantly as the supreme

all-transcendent Light. This is the meaning.

Asṣ itis hard to understand, he himself explains the (preceding) verse.

Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha 20/29. Vasudeva (p. 442 n 149) suggests emending
mukteḥ to yatne, but I see no good reason for that. Invoking grammatical irregularities
as a reason for emendation is not convincing, as the Sanskrit of these texts freely resorts

to them for metric reasons.

MS Jh, Ñ read: -virodhena for -viruddhena. The word ‘siddhānta’ may mean a

number of things here. One is the basic, literal sense of the word, namely, ‘proved

conclusion’ʼ, which may mean, by extension, ‘philosophy with reference to doctrine.

Another meaning is the ‘Śaiva tradition’ in general. More specifically, each of the

Āgamas of the Śaivasiddhānta is a ‘siddhānta’ in its own right. They deal with a range

of topics. Apart from matters concerning ritual, they include a philosophy or theology of
Deity, man and the world, the cause and nature of bondage, its remedy and the like. This

may well be meant here. Anyway, the sense is clear. Reasoning applied to the teachings

concerning these matters should not contradict what has been taught in the scriptures,

rather it should enhance and deepen it. Sound Reasoning is the means by which the
teachings are assimilated, and ultimately their truth is experienced directly. It is not

reason applied independently of revelation. Reason alone, devoid of direct experience,
cannot grasp the nature of reality.

understand the word artha here to mean the goal or purpose of life, that is, what is

commonly called puruṣārtha in the Dharmaśāstras. There we find a standard set of
four, namely, conjugal love (kāma), (right) livelihood (artha), righteous conduct
(dharma), and liberation (mokṣa). The last of these is considered to be a latter addition

to the basic group constituted by the first three.
Read svayam eva for svayamava.

TANTRĀLOKA

Mistaken Attachment to Lower Paths

a: dTaāīTaúṝe |

T TITITĀT|

faftrūṝ fīarītar ārar frafṝāṣṣa
ṇ g 1
mārgo ‘tra mokṣopāyaḥ sa heyaḥ śāstrāntaroditaḥ |
viṣiṇoti nibadhnāti yecchā niyatisaṅgatam || 17 II
rāgatattvaṁ tayoktaṁ yat tena tatrānurajyate |

(What is meant) here (by a) path is a means to liberation taught by

other scriptures, that should (therefore) be abandoned. The desire
(mentioned above) which constrains (viṣiṇoti), that is, binds, denotes the

principle of Attachment (rāgatattva) in conjunction with (that of) Necessity
(niyati). It is due to that that (the mind) is attached there (to that
misleading path). (17-18ab)

It was previously established that a path taught by other scriptures

(śāstra) should be abandoned. So there is no need to repeat that here. The sense

of the root ‘ṣiī’ (from which the word ‘viṣiṇoti’, meaning ‘constrains’, is
derived) is ‘bondage’. Preceded by (the prefix) ‘vi’, the word ‘viṣaya’ (which
means ‘object (of desire)’ is derived from the same root). Thus, this binding
‘desire’, in the form of a (binding) object (of desire), is the particular (insidious)
intention, ‘may this be mine’. In a general sense (sāmānyena), ‘it is the
principle of Attachment (rāga) in conjunction with (that of) Restraint
(niyati)’. The principle of Attachment is just the craving (abhilāṣa) (itself) for
all (binding) objects (of desire in general); the principle of Restraint is that same
(craving when) it arises (with some particular) fixed (niyata) object (of desire).
Thus, the principle of Attachment should be defined in conjunction with it. It is
due to that (combination of the two) that the mind ‘is attached there’, that is, is

firmly established by that (principle of) attachment to a fixed (particular) path

that should be abandoned. This is the meaning.

Surely (one may object that this applies) in every case (and so all

reasoning is unsound). (As is said) elsewhere:

“ Concerning these two principles, see below, 9/45cd-48ab, 62-66ab, 119cd-200ab,
202cd-203. Necessity — niyati — is the principle that determines that specific causes have
their specific effects. It is also the moral Law of Karma, which ordains that every action
we do has its appropriate consequence — good, if the action is good, and bad if the action
is bad. The principle of Attachment works together with Necessity. It is due to these two
that individuals follow a teaching that cannot lead beyond the level of Māyā, of which

these two are its aspects. The principle of Attachment impels the ignorant into feeling,

“I need this”. In this context, it is the mistaken attachment to a wrong or incomplete

view.
l Read with MSs Ch and Jh niyate for niyateḥ.
2 Cf. below, 13/28.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


‘Those low people who are not devoted to the teacher, deity, fire and
the scripture, who take their support from dry logic, know (only) the
deliberations produced by false reasoning. By (their) desire for liberation, Māyā
makes (them) wander about (confused) in what is not liberation.’

Again,

‘The discipline of logic (hetuśāstra) that is (prevalent) in the world

misleads as to the nature of what is eternal and what is not. Uncertain, (those
who follow it) dispute (with one another) with dogmatic (arguments) (vāda),

quibbles (jalpa) and idle carping (vitaṇḍa). O lady of good vows, statements
based on (dry) logic are devoid of (any) reality (vastu), knowledge, Yoga and
deity. (No) certainty can (ever) arise (by means of them) concerning (the true
nature) of righteous conduct (dharma), (right) livelihood (artha), sexual
fulfilment (kāma) (or) liberation. Composed by ignorance for an irreligious (and

immoral) (adharma) purpose, they send those people who are devoted there (to

false logic) to hell.

Censoring this (kind of) logic, in this way the Lord (Himself) has
explained its low (unspiritual) nature and (has also) said with that same
intention (in this way) that one should also avoid a teacher who knows (only)

that (kind of dry logic). As is said: ‘one should not take a logician as a teacher.”
Again: ‘there is (only) death and bondage (to be had) in a logician.” They
themselves who, pierced by this (dry logic), are engaged in it, have said

(concerning their opponents):

‘Devoid of (any certain) conclusion (nirṇaya) concerning reality, each
contradicted by the other, the sole essence (of their nature) pride, we are
ashamed (jitrīma) by those whose intellect is given to (dry) logic.”
Well, (one may ask,) how it is that that is said here to be excellent?

(Surely) in this way (the teachings of the) scriptures would be contradicted. As
there is just one source of authority for both cases (i.e. that sound reasoning is a
means to realisation and that dry logic is an impediment to it), it is not possible
to discern what is not authoritative even in (just) one case. So what should one
admit here (in this case to be correct)? (Our reply is that) one should admit that

the subject (viṣaya) here (in this case) differs, so that everything may be in its

own (proper) place. Indeed, logic (tarka) is of two kinds. A certain (kind of

logic) is predominantly deceit and the like, devoid of (any correct) assessment
of reality (vastunirṇaya). It is like (senseless) quibbling, that ultimately results
in just getting the better of (someone) else. (Another) kind (of logic) discerns

between what should be adopted and what should be abandoned (for one’s

SVT 10/1140cd-1141. Jayaratha quotes these lines again as part of a longer passage
drawn from the Svacchandatantra (10/1138cd-1141) below in his commentary on 4/38,

where Abhinava quotes the last line. He quotes SVT 10/1141ab above in his
commentary on 1/21. Abhinava quotes all this passage below in 8/333-336 (332cd336ab) and the last line in 13/317ab.
SYT 11/174cd-177.

“’ Read -bādhitābhiḥ for ~bodhitābhiḥ.

TANTRĀLOKA

spiritual benefit), and so results in a (certain) conclusion concerning (the nature
of) reality (vastunirṇaya), and devoid of deceit and the like, it is like (a sound)
view (vāda). There (in that case), the first is devoid of a (certain) conclusion
concerning (the nature of) reality and so is a low (form of reasoning). Thus it
was

said

(in

the

quote

above

that)

devoid

of

(any)

reality . . . (n0) certainty can (ever) arise . . .
Thus it is said that those who know (only) that (kind of logic) should

also be avoided, because they have no knowledge of reality. Whereas that

(sound discriminative reasoning) which, by assessing carefully what is to be
abandoned (and adopted) etc., leads to the purification (of one’s understanding

of the nature) of reality and, having abandoned that which should be given up,
brings one to rest in that which should be adopted, is the supreme and most
excellent ancillary of Yoga. Thus, there is no defect at all (in this teaching
concerning sound discriminative reasoning). Accordingly, the distinction

(between these two forms of reasoning) is that ours is sound discriminative

reasoning (sattarka), whereas that of (any) other philosophy is unsound
(asattarka).

Surely (one may ask,) the people of this world are (always) intent on

their own (selfish) goals and, independent of scripture, act by themselves to

remove what needs to be abandoned and take up what needs to be taken up (to

achieve their goals). Scripture is of no use to someone who is hungry (to teach

him that he needs to) eat, and someone who is dirty (that he needs to) bathe. So

what is (the purpose) here of reasoning? With this doubt in mind, he says:

3qgJ] āIJISÑATĪ gRJTIGRATJaTI ||2¢ 1

yathā sāmrājyasaṁbhogaṁ dr̥ṣṭvādrṣṭvāthavādhame || 18 II
bhoge rajyeta durbuddhīs tadvan mokṣe ‘pi rāgataḥ |

Just as a foolish person is (equally) attached to vile pleasures

(bhoga), whether or not he has experienced the pleasure (of a king who
enjoys) imperial sovereignty,® such is the case with liberation also, due to
(one’s) aṭṭachment (rāga) (to lower teachings, whether or not one has
experienced something of the higher ones). (18cd-19ab)
Just as some ignorant person, who does not know how to discriminate
between what is to be adopted and what is to be abandoned, whether he has
known ‘the pleasures of imperial sovereignty” or not as one who is rightly fit
to enjoy (them or not) is, because of (his) attachment, ‘(equally) attached to

vile pleasures (bhoga), that is, the objects of enjoyment of unfortunate people.

(This is) because he is attached (to them) due to the influence of previous latent

impressions (of past actions impelled by worldly desires) that have developed
for a long tīme and matured. In just the same way, having abandoned the
directly evident (sākṣāt) (path to) liberation, (he is attached) to a false (notion
Read -dṛṣṭvāthavādhame for <dṛṣṭvāthabādhame.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


of) liberation. This is the meaning of (this) statement. Thus, it is necessary to
apply (sound) discriminative reasoning in order to abandon what should be
abandoned and take up what should be taken up. And so it is rightly said that:
‘(sound discriminative) reasoning is the most excellent ancillary of Yoga.”
Surely (one may ask,) everybody is naturally (svabhāvataḥ) attached to
this or that philosophy (darśana), with which intended (sense) it is said
elsewhere that:
‘(Who knows) by what people who are attached (to worldly pleasures
are impelled); not knowing® what is to be done and what not, take on the
difficulties (and dangers) of (false) philosophies and, alas, are cheated.”
(Such a person) also (attains the kind of) liberation appropriate to each

particular (path). So what is this attachment (you refer to)? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

Tq TJĪW’ ṢcT: īaṀĪATGĀ: T T TjeḤ I| 28 |
sa evāṁśaka ity uktaḥ svabhāvākhyaḥ sa tu sphuṭam |I 19 ||

siddhyaṅgam iti mokṣāya pratyūha iti kovidāḥ |

This (form of attachment) is said (in the scriptures) to be (devotion

to some lower deity that accords with one’s own natural disposition. This

deity is technically termed) ‘the limb (aṁśaka) called one’s own nature
(svabhāva)’. It is evident (that, at best, it is the source of) accomplishment
(siddhi) (of a lower level of attainment), which is (just) (an ancillary) limb

(aṅga) (of the path). Thus, according to the wise, it is an obstacle to
liberation. (19cd-20ab)

called

‘This’ attachment is said in the scriptures (āgama) to be ‘ṭhe limb
one’s

own

natureʼ.

Such


Svacchandatantra,’ beginning with:


is

(the

teaching)

in

the

venerable

“’ MV 17/18ab, also quoted abovein TĀv ad 1/9. See above, 4/15-16 also below 4/86.
“ Read with MSs K, Kh, and N read ajānataḥ -- ‘not knowingʼ for apaśyataḥ — ‘not
seeingʼ.
“’ Read raktasya for riktasya, pralabáhā for vilabáhā and bata for vata.
” The following citations are drawn from chapter eight of the Śvacchandatantra, which
is just thirty-six verses long. It deals with the so-called six ‘limbs’ (aṁśaka). These are
briefly explained by Kṣemarāja in his commentary on this line (SVT 8/1ab). He first
supplies a series of definitions of the term ‘aṁśa’, which, according to the context,

means ‘limb’ or ‘part’. Gods and a range of supernatural beings are called ‘limbs’,
because they are ‘parts’ of Bhairava. A devotee of these beings is also referred to as an

‘aṁśaka’, in the sense that he adheres so closely to the deity that he is, as it were, a part

of him and vice versa. Again, the manner in which the deity is worshipped, the offerings

made, and even the sentiment felt towards it are each an ‘aṅsa’ or related to it

TANTRĀLOKA

‘O goddess, I will tell (you) about the limb (arhśaka) which is of six
kinds. (They are,) the limb of the Emotive State (bhāvāṁśaka), the one called
Own Nature (svabhāva), and there is also the limb of the ‘Falling of the

Having announced (the subject in this way), this (limb) is characterized

with (these verses) onwards:

‘The (limb called) Own Nature is the behaviour (cesṣrā) (with respect to

the deity). I will tell (you that) in due order. (One who is) Brahmā’s limb is
devoted to the Vedas. Know Rudra’s limb from me. (He is) devoted to Rudra

and very well behaved. He is always devoted to Śiva’s scriptures.”

(‘aṁśaka”). Finally, an accomplishment a deity bestows is an ‘aṁśaka’, that is, a ‘small

part’ that contributes to the adept’s progress. The passage reads:

“The limbs are said to be the limbs of the supreme Bhairava of Consciousness.

They are Brahmā and other (gods) who are made manifest by (Bhairava’s) energies, that
is, Brāhmī and the rest who preside over them. Then those who are the objects of their
grace are also said to be (their) ‘limbs’. Thus, that which relates to the limbs as objects
of worship, such as ‘this is the limb of Brahmā’, ‘this is the limb of Viṣṇu’ and so on in
due order, that is, the (six), sentiments (bhāva), own nature (svabhāva) and so on that
will be explained, are said to be ‘related to a limb’ (aṁśaka). Moreover, in relation to
the means of attainment (sādhaka) (it is called this) because it is conducive to
attainment (siddhi). (Again,) it is called an ‘aṁśaka’ because (taking the suffix ‘-ka’ as a
diminutive) it is a small part (aṁśa).’ ŚvTu ad 8/1ab

SVT 8/1cd. The following line supplies the names of the remaining ‘limbs’, which are

Mantra and Effecting (āpādāna), which is of two kinds. Kṣemarāja explains: ‘the (limb
called) Emotive State (bhāva) is the natural (sahaja) (one of the devotee). It is the
disposition of the mind (āśaya) of devotion for this or that (deity). (The one called) Own
Nature is the behaviour (vyāpāra) which accords with that (emotive state). The limb of
Mantra is that (phase of initiation in which) a flower (cast by the neophant), in accord
with the procedure (described) previously, falls (into a grid of letters representing

various possible Mantras), (so that,) in order to worship (the appropriate deity), the

nature of the deity which is denoted by (the corresponding) Mantra is ascertained. (The
next one) relates to the limb of Mantra, even if its nature has not been described (here).

It is done for the worshipper by offering to the fire Kaula sacrificial substances
(vīradravya) etc., or in (the course of) the ritual procedure for the initiation of an adept
(sādhaka), and so is of two kinds. ŚSuch are the six limbs.”

” SVT 8/3cd-4ab. t seems that this limb is called ‘Own Nature’ for three reasons. One is

to indicate that the deity to which the adept is devoted accords with his nature or
disposition. The other is that that ‘own nature’ is the particular deity to which the

devotee adheres so closely that he is, as it were, a part of it. Again, the deity is that
particular ‘limb’ or ‘aspect’ of Bhairava. The two lines Jayaratha quotes refer to just two

such ‘limbs’, that is, to the devotee who is a ‘limb of Brahmā’ and to the one who is a
‘limb of Rudra’. In the following verses, another thirteen are listed along with the

qualities or accomplishments (siddhi) received in accord with the nature of the deity or
supernatural being of which he is a ‘limb’. They are: Candra (the Moon), Yakṣa, Vāta
(Wind), Nāga (Snake), Gandharva, Vidyādhara, Daitya (Demon), Kāma (Passion),
Rakṣas, Piśāca, Agni (Fire), and Savitṛ (Sun). The Tantra and Kṣemarāja’s commentary

continue:


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Surely (one may ask,) if that is the case, then every such person would,
in accord with his own nature (svabhāvavaśāt), attain the liberation which is

appropriate for himself, so what is (the purpose of) this distinction for him

between that which should be abandoned and that which should be adopted (as

he will anyway follow his own path according to his inclinations)? With this
doubt in mind, he says: ‘it is (evident (that, at best, it is the source of)
accomplishment)”. Again, this kind of ‘own nature’ is ‘evident’. (It is said
that): ʻthe individual soul (is the principle attained by) the followers of the
Sāṁkhya”.” Thus, it is established by the authority of the scriptures that it is a
limb of the accomplishment (siddhi) which is the enjoyment (bhoga) proper to
the corresponding principle (of a particular school and not ultimate, permanent
liberation) as it is subject to decay. (Moreover,) even so, according to those

who know the scriptures, it is an impediment to liberation for such reasons as

(the following, given in the Yogasūtra):

“‘They all bestow the fruits of their own (corresponding) accomplishment, by
meditating (on them), repeating (their) Mantra and making offerings (dedicated to them)
to the fire.’ (ibid 8/1 1ab)
(The deity that is) worshipped bestows (benefits) on adepts in accord with the

degree of its command (of particular accomplishments). Referring to them in this way,

(the Tantra) says that the emergence of a Mantra of a limited limb bestows this or that
(particular) plane (of attainment). . . . (It is said that): ‘He is conjoined there to wherever
the worldly benefits (bhoga) he desires (may be) (and so) is successful by the power of
Mantra. If (this is s0), in accord with this view, (it takes place) here (in this case) by
means of the corresponding Mantras by which the adept has been initiated. By

worshipping with those Mantras, the particular deities are worshipped, which are then

all forms of Bhairava and (so) are means to the attainment of all accomplishments. (The

Tantra) says this:


‘O fair faced lady, all the deities who have attained (the condition of being)

limbs of Bhairava are said to be Bhairavas and they all bestow the fruits of
accomplishment.”” (ibid. 8/11cd-12ab)

In other words, when particular deities are worshipped with their
corresponding Mantra, they bestow particular benefits to the degree in which they have

the power to do so. But if they are worshipped with the Mantras that were given in the
course of initiation into the worship of Bhairava, these deities become aspects of
Bhairava, and as such, Bhairavas in their own right. Then they bestow all the fruits of
worshipping Bhairava. In terms of what Abhinava
ying, the point is that the deities
of followers of other traditions are in reality just partial aspects of Bhairava, but they do

not know that, and so the fruit they bestow, that is, the form of liberation to which they

lead, amounts to just a particular accomplishment (siddhi) along the path. If they are
recognised to be what they are, they and the forms of liberation they bestow are

understood to be stages along the path. Otherwise, they are just relatively minor
accomplishments, and so if the aspirant is satisfied just by them and does not seek
further, they are obstacles to the attainment of liberation.

” SVT 11/70a. Cf. above comm. and notes to 1/33.
Read parimlānatayā for aparimlānatayā.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘the invitation of the celestial beings should not be accepted nor should
it be a cause of vanity, because it entails the possibility of undesirable

consequencesʼ.”

He whose nature (svabhāva) is such believes that the accomplishment

(siddhi) (he achieves), which is the attainment of its (corresponding) reality

level (tattva), is liberation. Thus, he rests within what appears (to him) to be
liberation, (although) it should be abandoned (in order to progress further).
In this way, because (his) nature is such, having abandoned the direct

(sākṣāt) (and clearly visible) means to liberation, he is attached (āsakta)
elsewhere (to other lower teachings). Thus, he says:

fēāāā ta fē 1 20 1

śivaśāsanamāhātmyaṁ vidann apy ata eva hi || 20 |
vaiṣṇavādyeṣu rajyeta mūḍho rāgeṇa rañjitaḥ |

Thus, although the fool knows the greatness of Śaiva doctrine,

affected by (this) attachment, he would prefer (the teachings) of the
Vaiṣṇavas or others. (20cd-21ab)

Surely (one may ask,) if he knows the excellent power of Śaiva doctrine

as the direct means to liberation, why is he attached elsewhere (to some other

teaching)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

yatas tāvati ṣā tasya vāmākhyā śaktir aiśvarī || 21 ||
pāñcarātrikavairiñca saugatāder vijrmbhate |

YSū 3/51. Vyāsa’s commentary (as translated by Hariharānanda Āraṇya) explains:

‘the celestial beings in a high place, noticing the purity of the intellect of those who by
reaching [the level of concentration called] Madhumati have attained unalloyed truth,
try to invite them [to their worlds] by tempting them with the enjoyments available in
their regions . . . Thus accosted, one should however ponder over the danger of their

companionship . . . Not having formed any attachment, let him not also feel a sense of
gratification that he is coveted by the celestial beings. Through self-gratification a false
sense of security arises, and a man forgets that death has got him by the hair.”

Jayaratha quotes this sūtra here, because each metaphysical principle spans a

number of world-orders governed by particular deities (i.e. ‘celestial beings’). The

attainments (siddhi) acquired by reaching the principle a particular system considers to
be ultimate, and hence liberation, are bestowed upon the adept by the being to which he
is to devoted as his deity, that governs the worlds it contains.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


This is because this divine power called Vāṃā, which (functions just

to) this extent, unfolds (its influence) over the followers of the Pāñcarātra,
Brahmā (i.e. Vedāntins), the Buddha and others. (21cd-22ab)
‘The power called Vāmā (functions just to) this extentʼ, that is, it

bestows just this or that limited (ṇiyata) accomplishment. According to the

dictum, ‘Vāmā (is so called because she) emits (vamanāt) the world of

transmigration,"” she is (Śiva’s) power of obscuration that generates the world
of transmigration. This
is the meaning. The followers of Brahmā are the
Vedāntins (brahmavādin).
Surely (one may ask,) if, not knowing the greatness of Śaiva doctrine,
(someone) is attached elsewhere (to other lower teachings), let that be. What

defect (can there be in that)? But knowing (its greatness), how can that be?


With this doubt in mind, he says:


ÇTT: aīJŪēzāīī f-rzzā āsfī atzaī u 222 1

dṛṣṭāḥ sāmrājyasaṁbhogaṁ nindantaḥ ke ʻpi vāliśāḥ || 22 ||
na tu saṁtoṣataḥ sveṣu bhogeṣv āsīḥ pravartanāt |
There are some fools who have experienced the pleasures of
imperial sovereignty (and yet) deprecate it, (but) not because they are

content; (rather it is) because (they are) engaged in their own (petty)

pleasures, hoping (to gain what they desire). (22cd-23ab)

Here (in this world) there are indeed some who are like fools. Even

though they have known ‘the pleasures of imperial sovereignty’ to be
desirable as they are the most excellent, and ‘have experienced’ (them),

TĀ 6/57a. Cf. vāmā viśvasya vamanād YHrṛ 1/37c. The full line is quoted below in

TĀv ad 13/207cd-208ab (207). Vāmā is one of an important group of four goddesses,
namely, Vāmā, Jyeṣṭhā, Raudrī and Ambikā (cf. quote from Tantrasadbhāva in TĀv ad
3/65cd-66ab (66); also see quote ad 4/173ab). Omitting the last, Vāmā also appears as

part of the triad consisting of the first three (see below, 6/52-57, 8/356-357 (355cd-

357ab), 452ab (451cd)). She also appears, with them, in other groupings (see below,
SVT 10/1117-1118ab, quoted in TAv ad 8/294cd-298 (294-298ab), also 8/339ab

(339cd), and 15/305-306 with reference to MV 8/62cd-66). She is commonly paired
with Jyeṣṭhā, who embodies Śiva's liberatīng power, whereas Vāmā embodies His

binding power, that is, Śiva's power of delusion (vimohīśakti) (23/53). Vāmā is the
active energy engaged in obscuring the soul (see 13/314cd-316ab). But when she is

tranquil (śāntā), she no longer does so. Instead, reverting back to her essential nature,

she on the contrary reveals the soul’s true Śiva nature (13/207cd-208ab (207)). Then she
is Jyeṣṭhā, the power that graces the soul. Thus, the two work in opposite ways

(28/382cd-383ab).

I is understandable that someone who does not know about the Śaiva teachings and
their value follows another path, and he cannot be blamed for that. But if one does know
it, how is it that that person does not follow that path, preferring another instead?

Cf. above 4/18¢d-19ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

because of their foolishness ‘deprecate’ them. However, they do not do so
because they are content, that is, because their desire for (worldly) pleasures has

been completely removed; it is (their) disposition (to consider it) proper to
deprecate them. This is the intended sense. Fools, on the contrary, are not

content thereby (tāvat), for they are engaged ‘in their own petty pleasuresʼ,
(expressing their) good wishes (to one another) that ‘may it be so (as you desire)
again and again’ʼ, because (their) craving for (worldly) pleasure has not been set
aside. In this way, although they know the greatness of Śaiva doctrine, foolish
(as they are), they are engaged in deprecating it, and are seen to be attached
elsewhere (to other lower teachings), due to which, because they are governed
by (the power of) Vāmā, they plunge again and again into transmigratory
existence.

He says that:


dõ ēTaTa’=rTCTHTTT: I 33 I

a 1
evaṁ cidbhairavāveśanindātatparamānasāḥ || 23 ||
bhavanty atisughorābhiḥ śaktibhiḥ pātitā yataḥ |
In the same way, struck down by the most terrible divine powers,
there are those whose minds are dedicated to deprecating penetration into
the Bhairava of Consciousness.™ (23cd-24ab)

The meaning is that ‘the most terrible divine powers’ characterized

(as follows in the Mālinīvijayottaratantra) are the lower (aparā) powers called

Ghoratara (Extremely Terrible):


‘(Embracing the individual souls) attached to sense objects, they cast

them down to ever lower levels.”

Thus, this deluded person does not emerge out of (the ocean of)

transmigratory existence. Accordingly, he says:

ī̄ TTTTTRIT
STITR: ṢJṬĪĀĪTT-T I Ṝ I

See below, 13/311 ff. and 14/1-23. According to Swami Lakshmanjoo, ‘penetration
into the Bhairava of Consciousness’ means Saivism here.

MV 3/31ab. Jayaratha, quoting from this well-known passage, implicitly also

illustrates the basic principle that Śiva’s powers can both elevate and cast the individual
soul down. As the power Vāmā, Śiva’s power of freedom operates as the power of
obscuration (tirodhanaśakti), which binds the ignorant. But when He elevates wise
souls, it operates as the power of grace (anugrahaśakti). From another perspective, the
former aspect is Māyā and the later Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyā). Jayaratha quotes

the first of these three verses above in TĀv ad 3/103cd-104ab and below ad 8/35cd-42ab

and 13/279cd-280ab. See above note to comm. on 3/71ab (71) for the complete

reference. Also Dyczkowski 1992a: 70 and 337.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


tena śāṅbhavamāhātmyaṁ jānanyaḥ śāsanāntare || 24 ||
āśvasto nottarītavyaṁ tena bhedamahārṇavāt |
Thus, he who knowing Śiva’s greatness (and yet) has faith in (some)

other teaching should not, for this reason, be lifted out of the great ocean of

duality (bheda). (24cd-25ab)

He (obstinately) adheres (niṣṭha) (to that inferior teaching) because (his)

heart has faith (in that), not because, as (one who is) upright is intent on

maintaining the unity of society, (and so observes different forms of practice) in

accord with the teaching (that he should be) ‘inwardly a Kaula, outwardly a
Śaiva, and for (the duties of) daily life a Vaidika’. Thus, he does not emerge out

of the ocean of transmigratory existence, (but is) within it because (his)
experience of emerging (from it to then again be) submerged (in it again) has

not ceased.

Thus, (in order to establish) that what we have stated is not just our own

idea, he says:

lea-aeISJAEṞIMFETUISTE&IEURI
śrīkāmikāyāṁ proktaṁ ca pāśaprakaraṇe sphuṭam || 25 ||
And (that) has been clearly said in the venerable Kāmikā™ in the

‘chapter on bondage’ (pāśaprakaraṇa). (25cd)

! This kind of person is unable to accept the higher Śaiva teachings because, even

though he knows them, he has rejected them. For the same reason, he is also not fit to be

elevated to the nondualist Śaiva teachings. In other words, it seems that Abhinava is
saying here that such people should not be given Śaiva initiation. Cf. below, 21/16.

Whatever the outer practice for reasons of social conformity may be, it is the internal
practice that defines the true status and belonging of the practitioner.
Sanderson (2005: 285 n 136) explains: ‘Dropping —saṁhitā and transferring the
feminine ending to the preceding word is a common practice when citing the names of
both [Vaiṣṇava] Pāñcarātrika and Śaiva scriptures. Cf. Pauṣkarā for Pauṣkarāsaṁhitā
and Sātvatā for Sātvatasaṁhitā in Spandapradīpikā (p. 3 and 21).” Brunner (1985: xiv)
and Rastogi (1987: 281) have noted this change in gender/feminine inflection.
Moreover, Goodall has noticed the title Kāmikāsaṁhitā in the Jñāānaramāvalī (IFP T.
231, p. 623) (Gollner (2021:71). Note that in this case, the Kāmika that is traditionally

considered to be a Siddhānta, certainly not a Vaiṣṇava scripture is called a ‘saṁhitā’, a
term more commonly used to denote a Vaiṣṇava scripture, thus clearly illustrating that
the distinction sometimes made between Śaiva Tantras as ‘Āgamas’ and Vaiṣṇava ones

as ‘saṁhitās’ is not at all accurate.

We find the masculine form in 1/58-59ab (59-60ab), 1/65 (66), 22/31cd-32,
23/4, 32/48 and the feminine in 4/25cd-27, 6/96-97ab (95cd-96) (see note there), 6/190-

191 (189cd-191ab) 8/213cd-215ab (213-214). Similarly, Gollner ibid, p. 70 has
suggested that ‘given that both masculine and feminine inflections are found throughout

the Tantrāloka, it is conceivable that Abhinavagupta was drawing on more than one
version of the Kāmika.’ Again (ibid. p. 76) ‘we can observe that Kṣemarāja, like
Abhinavagupta, here also uses the feminine-inflected ‘Kāmikā’, which suggests that he

too may have been aware of more than one version of the text.’ Although this is an

interesting hypothesis, it is hard to sustain it on just this evidence alone. For we find this

TANTRĀLOKA


He quotes that very (text):


rTGJṬTTTT: TTÑTTTÑIĀTṬĪ:; |

3 ḥfr̥gaāī sśīaT: ṂṬPī-īqTATT:|| 3ē |

fēzi 1 2.9

ye kecid ṛṣayo dhīrāḥ śāstrāntaraparāyaṇāḥ || 26 ||
bauddhārhatādyāḥ sarve te vidyārāgeṇa rañjitāḥ |
māyāpāśena baddhatvāc chivadīkṣāṁ na vindate || 27 ||

‘Those who know the Vedas, Sāṁkhya and Purāṇas, or are
dedicated to the (Vaiṣṇava) Pāñcarātra (taking it to be the highest), as well
as those few firm-minded Vedic sages (ṛṣi) who are dedicated to other
scriptures (considering them to be supreme), the Buddhists and the Jains

etc., are all (foolishly) delighted (rañjita) (by (limited) knowledge and
attachment. Thus, because they are bound by the fetter of Māyā, they do

not get Śiva’s initiation. (26-27)

The ‘firm-minded’ are those whose wise (insight) into the Vedas and

the like is firm (sthiraprajña). The ‘other scriptures’™ are the Vedānta and the

like. ‘ʻKmowledge and attachment’ taken together, form a copulative (dvandva)
compound. As (the word) ‘knowledge’ here (in this case) is next to the word
‘attachment’, it is said to be impure (limited) knowledge (not Pure Knowledge,
kind of change of gender in other cases also. For example, Abhinava refers to the
Kiraṇatantra/KiraṇatantralKiraṇaśāstra in the feminine (Kiraṇā) and Jayaratha calls it
a ṣaṁhitā (below 4/41cd-42ab and commentary).

Gollner (2021: 70) notes: ‘In the modern Kāmika, there is no chapter on bondage; the
modern text focuses rather on ritual and consists of but a large Kriyāpāda. A discussion

of bondage is a topic we would expect to find in a Jñānapāda or Vidyāpāda. A

Vidyāpāda aṭṭributed to the Kāmika exists amongst the manuscripts held at the Institut
Français de Pondichéry, although the text is not considered authoritative today (Kāmika,

Vidyāpāda TFP T. 830). In this Vidyāpāda, we find a discussion of bondage (ibid. pp 50-

51); however, we do not find these verses. Also, in this Vidyāpāda, as in the modern
Kāmika, chapter divisions are not referred to as prakaraṇas; they are referred to as
paṭalas,’

Cf. ‘The Vaiṣṇavas and others (like them) are regulated (niyamita) (by the observance
and doctrines found) in scripture, which is limited just to (as far as it can go) by the

principle of Attachment, and so they are not propense even to the upper (elevated)

systems (darśana). Thus, they are even averse to the teachings of a true teacher, true
scripture and sound reasoning. As is said in the Pārameśvarāgama,
‘AIl Vaiṣṇavas and the like are affected by (limited) knowledge and
attachment. Devoid of the knowledge of the Omniscient One, they do not attain the
supreme principle. TSā p. 22.

Read śāstrāntaraṁ for śāstrātaraṁ.

3.4


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


which is above the level of Māyā). Thus, those who (obstinately) adhere to the
Vedas and other such scriptures have fallen into (the domain of) Māyā, and so

do not acquire the knowledge of Śiva, whichis beyond that. Thus it is said:
‘because they are bound by the fetter of Māyā, they do not get Śiva’s
initiationʼ.
Previously, we explained (the nature of) the principle of Attachment
which, accompanied by the principle of Necessity, brings about attachment
(abhiṣyaṅgaprada) to the means to liberation taught in other scriptures, that is,
the Veda and the rest, with the words: ‘desire for the object (of desire)’’ drawn

from the Mālinīvijaya (śrīpūrvaśāstra), which is (our) corroborating authority
(saṁvādagrantha). This is not without reason. In order to elucidate (how this is
s0), he explains the term ‘attachment’ (rāga) (again) here (in this case) as well.

TṬTJGT ]

TṬTTSS rāTTāēq 1|

rāgaśabdena ca proktaṁ rāgatattvaṁ niyāmakam |
māyīye tac ca taṁ tasmiñ chāstre niyamayed iti || 28 I|

What is meant here by the word ‘attachment’ is the principle of

Attachment (rāgatattva)” that constrains (and regulates) (niyāmaka). It
constrains (a person) to adhere to some scripture belonging to the sphere of
Māyā (mmāyīyaśāstra).
The prose order is that ‘by the word ‘attachment’, for the reason about
to be explained, is meant ‘the principle of attachment (rāgatattva) which
constrains (and regulates). It ‘constrains’ in the sense that it brings about
atṭachment to some fixed (determined) (niyata) object (viṣaya), and so that
principle of Attachment leads (a person) to a ‘scripture belonging to the
sphere of Māyā’, such as the Veda, and it ‘constrains’ that foolish person (to
adhere to it, guided by the thought that): ‘this is what I need (and crave for)’,

and so establishes (consciousness) in a contracted state. Although the nature of

the principle of Attachment is just a craving for all (possible) objects (of desire)

in general (sāmānyena), even so, if a fixed (determined) object (of attachment)

were not to develop, that would not become manifest. Thus, it is necessary that
it should include the principle of Necessity. Thus, it is rightly said that: ‘the

principle of attachment constrains (and regulates)ʼ.

Surely (one may ask,) how is it that this person does not emerge out of
the sphere of transmigration even when he has attained the liberation taught in

Read taduttīrṇaṁ for taduttīrṇa.
Read pūrvaṁ for pūrva. See above, 4/17-18ab and also quote in TĀv ad 1/37-38ab.
The order in which the Obscuring Coverings are arranged varies in different scriptures.
See below, 9/45cd-48ab.

See above, 4/16b.
“ See below, 9/199cd-200ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

other scriptures, such as those of the Vaisṣ ṇavas? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

ṬGĪĪĀTSĀ ṢITT-TTT II Ṝ~X II

[Eḻ/eaEIPḺEI-ECEEEIĪACĒHI

T TJTTTSITHGĀTĒGTHd;I| 30 |
mokṣo ‘pi vaiṣṇavāder yaḥ svasaṅkalpena bhāvitaḥ |
paraprakṛtisāyujyaṁ yadvāpy ānandarūpatā || 29 ||
viśuddhacīttamātraṁ vā dīpavat saṁtatikṣayaḥ |
sa savedyāpavedyātmapralayākalatāmayaḥ || 30 |I

Again, the (form) that the Vaiṣṇavas and others (like them) have

conceived by their own imagination (saṁkalpa) liberation to be, namely,
union (sāyujya) with the Supreme Nature (paraprakṛti), or (by Vedāntins)

as the blissful nature (of the Brahman), pure consciousness alone (by

idealist — Vijñānavāda — Buddhists), or the extinction of the series (of
individual existences) like (blowing out)a lamp (by Vaibhāṣika Buddhists).
(They are all) in the state of (perceivers called) ‘Dissolution Deconditioned’

(Pralayākala) (which are of two kinds, namely,) those (in deep sleep)
‘associated with objectivity’ (savedya) (in which it is perceived,) and those
(in deep sleep) ‘free of objectivity? (apavedya) (in which it is not

perceived). (29-30)

' Cf. above 1/33 for another way of explaining the gradation of realisation for followers

of other schools. We have seen (above, 1/77-80 (78-81) and note 1,658) that there are
seven perceivers, arranged along the series of thirty-six metaphysical principles, that
experience corresponding spans of these principles. The first three perceivers are subject

to the ‘Force (of limited agency) (kalā), which is an energy of Māyā, that obscures their

consciousness in such a way that they are perceiving subjects related to objectivity,
which they experience as separate from themselves. The first of these is subject to all
the aspects of the Force (of limited agency) — kalā — and so is called ‘With Kalā’ —
Sakala. This is the perceiver who experiences the principles from Earth up to the
Individual soul, and is subject to all the three forms of Impurity (mala), that is,
Fundamental (āṇava), Māyā and Karma. The following two above that perceiver are

still within the realms of Māyā. The domain of the one called Dissolution Deconditioned
(Pralayākala, lit. ‘devoid of the forces of limitation in dissolution’) extends from the

individual soul to the beginning of Māyā. It is freed of some part of the Force (of limited

agency) that conditions it when cosmic dissolution (pralaya) takes place. In this

intermediate state between the end of one cosmic cycle and the beginning of another,
the individual soul loses personal consciousness and is in a state of deep sleep (suṣupti).
He is of two kinds, according to whether there is some consciousness of objectivity in
his deep sleep (savedya) or not (apavedya).

The first kind, in savedya (lit. ‘with objectivity°) deep sleep, experiences latent
traces of objectivity (vedya) and so is conscious to a degree. This type resides in the
domain of the obscuring coverings (kañcuka) that extends from the individual soul to

the Force (of limited agency). The second type resides in the Māyā principle above. In


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

’The (form of) liberation according to the view (mata) of the Vaiṣṇavas

and the rest (mentioned here), according to our philosophy (darśana), is (just)
the state (of the deep sleep) of Dissolution Deconditioned (perceivers)

(pralayākala). This is the connected (sense of these lines). There (in that

context), the ‘liberation’ Vaiṣṇavas (achieve is only) ‘union (sāyujya) with the

highest level of Nature (paraprakṛtī)’. According to that view (mata), the

Great Power (mahāvibhūti) called the Lord Vāsudeva is the ordainer (who

governs all) sentient and insentient (beings). For this reason and because He is

the essential nature (ṣvaṣvabhāva) of the Supreme Brahman, which is the

Supreme Nature (paraprakrti) by contemplating Him in this way and that as

this state it does not experience the duality of the lower principles and so is free of

Māyīya Mala. However, it is destined to wake up on the lower level.

Above that is the subject who is Consciousness Deconditioned (Vijñānākala);

that is, he is free from the Force (of limited agency) by virtue of his higher state of
consciousness (vijñāna). He too is free of objectivity as is the one who sleeps, but is
about to awaken either into the higher pure principles above Māyā or back down below.
The first of these is free of the impurity of Māyā, the second one of Karma also. Above
are the remaining four perceivers up to Śiva, in whom the impurity of individuality has

also been removed, and so they perceive the universe in various aspects of oneness, as is
the experience of the pure principles above Māyā within which they reside as their

perceivers. They are Mantra, Mantreśa, Mahāmantreśa and Śiva, who deputes them to
the domain over which they have authority. Here Abhinava declares, and Jayaratha
explains in detail, that these schools can lead only to the condition of the two types of

Pralayākala. In other words, they do not rise above the duality of Māyā. All this is

described at length below at the beginning of Chapter Ten.

The reader will recall that Abhinava introduces his Tantrāloka by explaining that the

Path he is teaching leads to complete and perfect knowledge of reality (pārṇajñāna),

which is complete liberation. This is the fully expanded state of consciousness of Śiva,
the supreme perceiver, in which there is no objectivity at all. Degrees of consciousness
expansion and hence knowledge of reality correspond to levels of subjectivity,

distinguished from one another according to the degree of objectivity with which it

identifies or perceives to be one with itself. Abhinava briefly characterized these levels
of subjectivity above in 1/31-33, declaring that they correspond to degrees of liberation,
without however mentioning any specific schools that teach them. Even so, it

occasioned a similar discussion by Jayaratha of these schools, such as the one we find
here, which the reader may compare (see TĀv ad 1/33).
“ There are differing degrees of union or proximity to the deity, which are considered

by various schools to be the ultimate, liberated condition of the individual soul. The
most dualist view maintains that liberation is an eternal condition of close proximity
(sāmīpya) to the Deity. Another similar view maintains that liberation is the state of the
soul when it resides in the same world as the Deity (sālokya). Others maintain that the
liberated state is one in which the soul shares the same nature (sārūpya) as the Deity,

although it does not become one with it. More intimate is the state of union (sāyujya)
mentioned here. In some sources, these are presented as four degrees of blissful

intimacy with the Deity. Vaiṣṇavas are, to varying degrees, as reflected in these

conceptions of liberation, dualists. Siddhānta, which to some degree, is less dualistic,

maintains that the liberated souls are in a state of ‘equality° (samatā) with Śiva (see

below, 4/74cd-77ab and comm.). Nondualist Hindu traditions maintain that liberation is

a state of oneness (tādātmya) with the Absolute Brahman or Deity.
” The theistic Sāṁkhya of the Bhagavadgītā diṣtinguishes between two Natures
(prakṛti) — lower (apara) and supreme (para). The former is the phenomenal and

TANTRĀLOKA

material nature, of which the material and mental things of the world are made, and the
latter is spiritual, that is, Kṛṣṇa’s own nature. In the Gītā we read, as translated by
Aurobindo: ‘The five elements (conditions of material being), mind, reason, ego, this is
my eightfold divided Nature (prakṛti). But know my other Nature different from this,
the supreme which becomes the individual soul and by which the world is upheld.”

Classical Sāmkhya posits a dualism between the perceiver, the individual soul, which is
pure consciousness, and the perceived, which is insentient Nature (prakṛti). The theistic
Sāmkhya of the Gītā modifies this view to overcome this antinomy. Otherwise, as
Aurobindo explains: ‘Nature then would only be the Māyā of the three guṇas and all
this cosmic existence would be simply the result of Māyā; it could be nothing else. But

there is something else, there is a higher principle, a nature of spirit, [as Kṛṣṇa says]
parā prakṛtir me [My supreme Nature]. There is a supreme nature of the Divine which

is the real source of cosmic existence and its fundamental creative force and effective

energy and of which the lower and ignorant Nature is only a derivation and a dark
shadow. In this higher dynamism Puruṣa and Prakṛti are one. Prakṛti there is only the

will and executive power of Puruṣa, his activity of being — not a separate entity, but
himself is Power.
This supreme Prakṛti is not merely a presence of the power of spiritual being

immanent in cosmic activities. For then it might be only the inactive presence of the allpervading Self, immanent in all things or containing them, compelling in a way the
world action but not itself active [as classical Sāṁkhya maintains]. Nor is the highest

Prakṛti the avyakta [Unmanifest Nature] of the Sāṁkhya, the primary unmanifest seedstate of the manifest active eight-fold nature of things, the one productive original force
of Prakṛti out of which her many instrumental and executive powers evolve. Nor is it
sufficient to interpret that idea of avyakta [the Unmanifest] in the Vedāntic sense and

say that the supreme Nature is the power involved and inherent in the unmanifest Spirit
or Self out of which the cosmos comes and into which it returns. It is that, but it is much

more; for that is only one of its spiritual states. It is the integral conscious-power of the
supreme Being, cit-śakti [the power of consciousness], which is behind the self and

cosmos. In the immutable Self it is involved in the Spirit; it is there, but in nivṛ1ti or a
holding back from action; in the mutable self and the cosmos it comes into action,
pravṛtti. There by its dynamic presence it evolves in the Spirit all existences and appears
in them as their essential spiritual nature, the persistent truth behind their play of
subjective and objective phenomena. It is the essential quality and force, svabhāva, the

self-principle of all their becoming, the inherent principle and divine power behind their

phenomenal existence. The balance of the guṇas is only a quantitative and quite
derivative play evolved out of this supreme Principle. All this activity could not be at all

except for this spiritual force and this power of being; it comes from that and it exists in
that and by that solely. (Aurobindo (2001): 268 ff.).

Although Aurobindo’s eloquent exposition of Deity, Visṇu and Kṛṣṇa
Vāsudeva, as the supreme Prakṛti according to the Gītā is not wrong, Abhinava’s
exegesis does not accept its identification, as this exposition effectively implies, with his

own Śaiva vision of the Supreme. From the Śaiva perspective, the devotee of Viṣṇu

cannot get beyond the spherein which the individual soul retains its limited conditioned
identity, even if in union with the Deity. Moreover, despite the distinction, underscored
by Aurobindo, the Gītā and other sources clearly make between the supreme Nature,
which is that of Viṣṇu, and the Unmanifest state of Nature, Abhinava effectively

understands it in an analogous way. In the state of the Dissolution Deconditioned

perceiver, the individual soul resides at the extremity of Māyā, temporarily free of the

dichotomizing effect of Māyā, and so enjoys some kind of union with the Deity which

possesses it, but it is sleeping and not free of its individuality. Moreover, it is destined to
return to the realm of Māyā when it awakes.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


the wonderful variety of (the cosmic) process (krama), and as all things,

although He is many (in this aspect),” one attains liberation which is the

realization (avagama) of oneness. (This is achieved) because the bond of change
(and distortion) (vikāra) has come to an end by not deviating from the oneness

of completely pure consciousness, by the practice of the knowledge of reality as
(taught) in Vedic scripture that declares, for example, that: ‘the Brahman is one
without a secondʼ. (This is possible) because multiplicity is not ultimately real.

As the Veda (śruti) says:


‘A quarter of Him is all existing things, the immortal in heaven is that of

the (other) three quarters.”

Moreover:


“. . . therefore creation manifests as (being as insubstantial as) a bubble

(of water).”

The liberation (attained by) (nondualist) Vedāntins (hrahmavādin) is

‘the blissful nature (of the Brahman)’. According to that view (mata), the
liberation of the Self experienced on the plane of transmigratory existence due
to the obscuration of ignorance is the experience (sarīvedana) (of the Self) as
beautiful with the innate bliss of its unending and most excellent (selfillumining) Light, when the obscuration of ignorance is removed by the practice
of the knowledge of reality, in accord with the Vedic dictum (ṣruti):

(it).”

‘one should hear about the Self, reflect (on its nature) and contemplate


As Veda (declares):


‘the Brahman is consciousness and bliss.’'
The liberation (attained by) Vijñānavādins (idealist Buddhisṭts) is pure

consciousness alone (cittamātra). According to that view, liberation is the direct
experience (sākṣātkāra) of one’s own nature as imperishable Light, (that takes

place) by the power (bala) of the turning about of the (deepest) seat (of

phenomenal) consciousness (āśrayaparāvṛtti), brought about by destruction of
each adventitious impurity through the practice of the contemplation of the
absence of self (nairātmya) etc., even when covered over with adventitious
“ Perhaps the text is corrupt here and we should read the passage from here to the next
paragraph as relating to the liberation the Vedāntin says is attained by realizing the

Brahman when understanding that the world of Māyā is just an illusion and hence
discovering that, unlike painful illusory Māyā, the real Brahman is bliss.

‘ ChUp 3/10/4.
‘ ṚgV 10/9073 quoted in ChUp 3/12/6.
“ Maṇḍūkyopaniṣad 3/15.
“ BṛUp 3/7/11.
.Br̥Úp 3/9/34, quoted from ŚB 14/6/9/34.

TANTRĀLOKA

impurities such as attachment and the rest, (that arise) due to the power (bala) of

beginningless

ignorance

of

the

continuous

flow

of

consciousness

(cittasaṇtāṉa),” which is luminous (prabhāsvara) by its very nature. As they
(the Yogācāra Buddhiṣṭs) say:

‘This mind is (self-)luminous; impurities are, by (their very) nature,

(just) adventitious (not innate to it). When they cease, that light, which is the

goal of all (sarvārtha), (shines) imperishable.”

According to the Vaibhāṣika (Buddhiṣṭs), liberation is ‘the extinction
of the series (of individual existences), like (blowing out) a lampʼ. According
to that view, the five Aggregates (skandha) beginning with Form arise due to
the afflictions (kleśa), Karma and the rest, which are their consequence. This

l Vijñānavāda — the Doctrine (that all that exists is) Consciousness — maintains, like all
Buddhiṣṭ schools, that perceived reality is momentary. It agrees with earlier schools that

aṭ the phenomenal level it is constituted by irreducible elements or factors of experience
called ‘Dharmas’ (see below, note 4,104), but they are aspects of the stream of

consciousness engaged in perception (pravṛttavijñāna), that is, illusory components of

the dream-like world of cognitive experience. The world, made solely of perceptions,
arises, as do dreams, on the basis of previous experiences. These are mistakenly thought
to be the perceptions of a perceiver. But in reality, the perceiver, like the perceived, is an
aggregate of factors — Dharmas — that arise together in the act of perception, in which
the distinction between subject and object, perceiver and perceived, prevails. Acting in

response to objectified perceptions, the illusory perceiver accumulates Karma which, in

a latent seed state, is deposited in a ‘storehouse consciousnessʼ (ālayavijñāna) which,
like a river, streams with these seeds. Eventually they mature to give rise to new

experience, which in turn generates more seeds. This continues as long as the mistaken
distinction between subject and object prevails due to adventitious (i.e. not intrinsic)

defects, such as the craving of the inevitably frustrated perceiver that it brings about.

When insight into this mistake develops, consciousness turns around as it were, away

from objectivity and the subjectivity that is invariably associated with it. If this reversal

is sufficiently sustained, it penetrates down into the deepest seat of consciousness, and
so ʻturning about’ the stream, the process of sowing the seeds of perception and creating
new ones ceases. Thus, the stream of the store house consciousness dries up, leaving

just the undefinable pure consciousness (cittamātra) — the ‘pure light— free of
subjectivity and its concurrent objectivity.

One could also translate ‘which is all that there is’.
PV 2/208. Also quoted above in TĀv ad 1/33. See note there.

' Early Sarvastivādin Buddhists are also called Vaibhāṣikas because they base their

views on a monumental commentary by Kātyāyanīputra of the first century BCE on the
Jñānaprasthāna (Arrangement of Knowledge’) called ‘Mahāvibhāṣā’ (‘Great
Commentaryʼ). The material there was systematically arranged with some additions by
Vasubandhu (c. fourth or fifth century CE) in his Abhidharmakośa. Abhidharma
literature focuses on identifying and classifying the ultimate components of the real,

called dharma. According to the Abhidharmakośa, the number of these closely

interdependent elementary principles are 75, divided into five groups (skandha). The
first group — Form (rūpa) (or ‘matter’) — comprises the five sensory organs and
nonconceptualized matter (avijñapti). The second group comprises just the mind, and

the third group forty-six mental functions. The fourth group consists of fourteen powers

not linked to the mind. The fifth group comprises the three unconditioned Dharmas, that
is, space (akāśa), ceṣsation deriving from reflection and not deriving from it


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


transmigratory existence is both. As they (the Vaibhāṣikas) say: “transmigratory
existence consists of cause and effect.’ Liberation, on the contrary, is the

blocking (nirodha) (of this process), which is like (the extinction of) a lamp,
that takes place because the oil etc. which is its cause has finished, and so (the

flame) cannot arise again. In the very same way, the five Aggregates beginning
with Form (are extinguished) by the destruction of impediments and Karma etc.
due to the practice of the contemplation of the absence of self (nairātmya). As
they say:
‘Just as (the flame of) a lamp that has ceased (to burn) (nirvṛtim

abhyupetaḥ) because the oil has finished goes neither to heaven nor earth, nor to
any of the directions, primary or secondary, it is simply extinguished, in the
same way the Yogi who has attained tranquillity (nirvṛtim abhyupetaḥ) because
the afflictions have ceased goes neither to heaven nor earth, nor to any of the
directions, primary or secondary, he simply attains peace (kevalam eti

(The perceivers called) ‘Dissolution Deconditioned’ (pralayākala) are
(of two kinds, namely) those ‘associated with objectivity’ (savedya) and those
‘free of objectivity (apavedya). The reason why this difference is specified (is
the following). Here (in this case, the liberation which is taught in) the first two
views (i.e. those of the Vaiṣṇavas and Vedāntins) is like (the state of) the
Dissolution Deconditioned (perceivers), who are associated with objectivity
(savedyapralayākala) as that of one who reflects on his own nature
(svātmaparāmarśaka) as the Brahman, because (Brahman) is bliss (and so there
is a trace of the experience of objectivity). Again, the other (of the two views of
liberation, namely those of the two Buddhist schools,) is like (the state of)
Dissolution Deconditioned (perceivers), who are free of objectivity
(apavedya-pralayākala), because (they) do not accept (the existence) of one

permanent perceiver of any kind.

(pratisaṁkhyāna-, and apratisaṁkhyāna- nirodha). These arise by the cessation of the
other Dharmas, which takes place by the realisation of the absence of Self (nairātmya).

The expression is kevalam eti śāntim, which literally means ‘it simply goes to

tranquillityʼ.

These two verses stem from the poet Aśvaghosa’s work Saundaranandana verses

16/28-29. Read with the version in Saundaranandana, diśaṁ na kañcid for deśaṁ na

kañcid in both instances in the third quarter of both verses. The first quarter of the

second verse reads evaṁ kṛti nirvṛtim abhyupeto (‘in the same way he who has reached
Nirvāṇa’ for yogī tathā nirvṛtim abhyupeto (‘in the same way the Yogi who has attained

tranquillity). My thanks to Prof. Buescher for pointing this out to me.

The preceding lines are significant: ‘So be aware, my friend, of the causes —
desire, for example- of the many types of birth, and if you seek freedom from suffering,

cut them off. For the destruction of an effect follows from the utter destruction of its

cause, and the destruction of suffering follows from the destruction of its cause. Set
Dharma before your eyes, which is peaceful and benign, with no passion for desire, a

resting place, a cessation, an eternal, irremovable and noble protection, in which there is
no birth, no old age, no death, no sickness, no association with anything unpleasant, no
failure of wishes and no separation from anything pleasant; its an ultimate, unfallen state
of ease. Translation by Linda Covil.

TANTRĀḶOKA

These four views (pakṣa) are representative of other views also, and so
(these can be analysed in the same terms). Thus, the (Nyāya) school of

Akṣapāda” and the like, which also maintains that in the liberated state

(apavarga) all (phenomenal) qualities of the Self have been destroyed, amounts

to the same (state of) Dissolution Deconditioned (perceivers), who are free of
objectivity (apavedyapralayākala). Dīssolution Deconditioned (perceivers) still
possess the remaining two impurities (mala) (that is, those pertaining to the
individual soul (āṇava) and Māyā), and so because the cause of transmigratory
existence has not ceased, (their) condition is subject to (the bondage of)

transmigration. Thus, it is said that the liberation which is like that should also

be abandoned. Moreover, the point is that the effort they exert in the state of
Dissolution Deconditioned (perceivers), even though it is much to their liking

(svarasikya), is useless because each of these principles (to which they aspire as
ultimate, will some time) dissolve away. Thus (the liberation others believe in

has been) ‘conceived by their own imagination (saṁkalpa), and because

these four views (of liberation) are (just) notions, it has been explained in this
way that they are unreal (avāstava).

Surely (one may ask, the view advanced) here is that liberation is the
destruction of bondage. The saying ‘one who is in darkness is better than one
who is blind’ applies to the Dissolution Deconditioned (perceiver), who (free of
Karmic impurity,) is bound by (just) two, (namely, those pertaining to Māyā and
the individual soul,) with respect to the (fully) Conditioned (sakala) (perceiver),

who is bound by (all) three impurities. So why should this (form of) liberation,

even if it is like that, be completely abandoned? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

TīTāTazaāī-̄ T Ūīēaī gftzāTTā; 1| 32 1

taṁ prāpyāpi ciraṁ kālaṁ tadbhogābhogabhuktataḥ |

tattattvapralayānte tu tadūrdhvāṁ sṛṣṭim āgataḥ || 31 ||
mantratvam eti saṁbodhād ananteśena kalpitāt |
He who has attained (these lower forms of liberation) enjoys for a
long time (their) pleasures or the absence of pleasure (in the case of one for

whom seeming liberation is emptiness). (After that, if he progresses, he)

!” Akṣapāda is said to be the founder of the Nyāya school of philosophy (see above note

to 1/247ab-247cd (247cd-248ab)). Torella (2011: 35) explains: “The textual corpus is
based on the Nyāyasūtra, a collection of brief aphorisms which assumed its (relatively)
definitive form in the fourth century CE, starting from an original nucleus that can be
dated to the second century CE. Its author is deemed to be a sage named Akṣapāda, who
later on (from the tenth century onwards) is designated as Gotama or Gautama. His
historical existence is rather doubtful, and everything known about him has a legendary

air, starting from the meaning attributed to the name Akṣapāda (‘he who has eyes in his

feet?). This derives from a special gift of the gods, worried by his repeated accidents

(falls etc.) due to his continuous absorption in profound and learned study.”


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


atṭṭains the higher level of creation at the end of the period of (cosmic)
dissolution, when that principle (namely Māyā, dissolves away). Then,

awakened by Ananteśa" to (the pure principles) above that (i.e. beyond
Maāyā), he becomes a Mantra (subject). (31-32ab)
The person (to whom these lines refer) is a Vaiṣṇava or the rest

(mentioned previously). Although ‘he’ has attained the (state of) liberation

which is like that of a Dissolution Deconditioned (perceiver) ‘for a long

timeʼ, he first ‘enjoys its pleasures or the absence of pleasure (in the case of

one for whom liberation is emptiness) of the delusion (moha) and the rest
associated with Dissolution Deconditioned (perceiver). (Then,) ‘at the end of

the period of (cosmic) dissolution’, ‘that principle’, namely, Māyā etc., which
is the plane of experience previously associated with the Dissolution
Deconditioned (perceiver, is dissolved away). Then again, at the beginning of (a
new) creation, ‘his awakening (leads him) to become a Mantra (perceiver) or to

transmigratory existence (as a Conditioned perceiver).’'"" Having received, in
accord with this principle (nīti), the descent of the power (of grace), by the
action of ‘Ānanteśa’, which stimulates (his powers of) knowledge and action,

he is ‘awakenedʼ. Having thus attained ‘above that’' the pure creation above

Maāyā, ʻhe becomes a Mantra (subject). Otherwise, (if he cannot manage to
rise, he) again (returns to the previous) state of bondage. This is established (by
the scriptures). Thus, even though the (form of) liberation taught in the
Vaiṣṇava and other philosophies has been attained, the world of transmigration
is not destroyed, and so it is said that there (in that regard, that these other forms

of liberation) should be abandoned.

' Ananteśa (also called Aghora or just Ananta) is the form of Śiva who operates on the

Impure Path (see below, 8/306ab-307ab (305-306) and 8/331ab-332cd (330cd-332ab)

and commentaries, and also 9/147-149ab). Thus, just as he generates the lower order, he

can awaken the individual soul to the higher one also.

' The Mantra subject resides in the realm of Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyā), which is

the first of the pure principles beyond Māyā. There he experiences that ‘I am all this
(world) and all this (world) am °. If, on the contrary, when he is awakened, he is pulled
down by the activated latent traces of his Karma into the duality of the realm of Māyā,
he experiences himself as different from the world around him, and all things as

different from one another.
'! Read pralayākalaprāyaṁ fot pralayākala prāyaṁ.
'! Read as found below in 10/135ab, prabodho ‘sya mantratvāya bhavāya ca for

prabudhyante mantratvāya bhavāya | See below, 10/135cd-137.

' Read tadūrdhvāṁ for tadārdhvā.

'' This is the highest form of liberation Vaiṣṇavas can attain. At most they can aspire to
this, not merger into Śiva, the supreme principle. Indeed, they do not even want to do
so. The cultivation of sound insightful reasoning (sattarka) leads to a deepening
understanding of what should be adopted and what should be abandoned by

understanding why this needs to be done. Rules and regulations concerning what must

and must not be done have a reason behind them. The Yogi who practices this Yoga
seeks thereby to understand it. This not only helps him to choose the highest path, it also
purifies his thoughts to make them more permeable to the light of consciousness, which
is freedom itself, that develops as he travels on it.

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask,) if the state of a Dissolution Deconditioned
(perceiver) is the same (for all of them), what is the reason here that some

(attain) the state of Mantra (perceivers) and others (return to the previous) state
of bondage? With this doubt in mind, he says:

etac cāgre taniṣyāma ity āstāṁ tāvad atra tat | 32 ||

We will deal with these matters at length further ahead, so let this

much suffice here. (32cd)


As he will say ‘further ahead’ in Chapter Nine etc. (where he says):


‘This is said to be Karmic impurity, with which the Dissolution
Deconditioned (pralayākala) subjects are associated. Like sleeping serpents,
they reside deep in the abyss of the cave (of Māyā). Then, when their latent
(karmic) impressions are awakened, they reap their appropriate consequences
and transmigrate repeatedly in this (universe), ranging from (the world of)
Brahmā down to that of plants. Again, those who have started to practice
meditation (bhāvanā) in order to destroy the latent impressions of their Karma,

(but are themselves) dissolved away in the great destruction (at the end of a
cosmic cycle) before their meditative practice has reached perfection, assume
the diverse states of the Mantra subjects brought about by their diverse Karma,

according to the degree in which the inner (impression) of their meditative

practice (bhāvanā) has reached maturity.˚'

‘So let this much suffice’, because (further discussions about these

matters) are of no use with reference to the (main) subject, which is the nature

of (sound discriminative) reasoning.

The True Teacher (gurusatattvaka)
Finding a True Teacher

Surely (one may ask,) if the world of transmigration is not destroyed by
the liberation taught in other philosophies, how is it Vaiṣṇavas and the others

are (s0) attached to it? With this doubt in mind, he says:

fāfta |
rāḡ cefra aāīT3 za | 33 1

tenājñajanatākḷrptapravādair yo viḍambitaḥ |
asadgurau rūḍhacit sa māyāpāśena rañjitaḥ || 33 1

'!" Below, 9/138-141. Abhinava expounds at great length and in detail the nature and

state of the seven perceivers in 10/1-186a. See also above, 1/77-80 (78-81).


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Thus, he who is deceived by (inferior) doctrines contrived by the
ignorant, and places his trust in a false teacher, is made to be attached (to
them) by the snare of Māyā.

‘He’ʼ, that is, a Vaiṣṇava or the like, has been deceived by the hordes of

teachers such as Kapila, with (their inferior) doctrines. There are, for

example, those (of the Sāṁkhya), regarding the discrimination (viveka) between
the individual souls and Nature contrived by them due to their ignorance. This is
because (each of these teachers) has been made to be intensely attached there (to
these inferior doctrines) by the Supreme Lord, Who is well known by all, by

means of the ‘snare of Māyā’, that is, the power called Vāmā." Thus, ‘he

places his trust in a false teacherʼ, that is, a particular teacher who teaches (the
nature of) reality. He does not just desire to know (him and his teachings), he
trusts (him blindly), whereas on the contrary, one who trusts a true teacher has

liberation (there in front of him) directly. This point is thus established by its

contrary counterpart (vyatireka)." Thus, after (having discussed) the nature of
(sound discrīminative) reasoning, in order to explain the nature of a (true)

teacher, which is (a subject) directly related to that and announced in the
preliminary enunciation, he has introduced (this, the next topic,) in this way.

Surely (one may ask,) if this is the case, no faith in a true teacher would

arise for a Vaiṣṇava and the like, because they are governed by Vāmā. So how
can there be any question of him attaining liberation directly? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

īīṁ: ṂJGTTā aī ā-ēōl TaĨTIT I 3: 1
so ʻpi sattarkayogena nīyate sadguruṁ prati |
sattarkaḥ śuddhavidyaiva sā cecchā parameśituḥ || 34 ||

However, even he is led to a true teacher" by (practicing) the Yoga

of Sound Reasoning (sattarkayoga). Sound Reasoning is (not just talk), it is
Pure Knowledge itself, and that is the will of the Supreme Lord.

'! Kapila, along with Āsurī and Pañcaśikha, is the legendary founder of the Sāṁkhya

philosophy, on which the Yoga taught by Patañjali in the Yogasūtras is based.
Accordingly, Jayaratha refers here to a fundamental concept of the Sāṁkhya.

! We have seen that there are two aspects of Śiva’s power that are embodied in two

goddesses. One is Vāmā, who is Māyā, that binds and deludes. The other is Jyeṣṭhā,
who is Pure Knowledge, that liberates and enlightens. See above, note 4,76.

""” It is standard form in a logical argument to establish that something is the case by

reference to both a positive example, analogy or affirmation, and then by checking that

that is correct by referring to a counter, contrary example. That a false teacher deceives
and cannot guide his disciple to liberation is underscored by the existence of a true
teacher who can do so.
'" This expression, i.e. nīyate sadguruṁ prati — ‘he is led to a true teacher — is found in
MV 1/44d. There it is one who is penetrated by Rudra’s power who is led to a true

TANTRĀLOKA
teacher.

‘Even he’, the Vaiṣṇava and the like, who has placed his trust in a false

Surely, (first a sound intention) develops by sound discriminative
reasoning concerning reality, which is sound and reasonable, (and then) a true
teacher is attained by Śiva’s power. Thus, it is said everywhere that:
‘Lord Śiva has said, wherever a firm trust (rūḍhi) arises in that which is
sound and reasonable (yuktiyukta) by the certainty (that comes by sound

discriminative reasoning), that is the grace of Pure Knowledge.”

“That’ is Pure Knowledge, (which is the) “will’ (of the Supreme Lord),
that culminates in the attainment of a true teacher, and its nature is grace.

Nor has he (simply) stated his own idea. Thus, he says:


faarg: ftrārzar 1

īa aṣge u 1 3uu

śrīpūrvaśāstre tenoktaṁ sa yiyāsuḥ śivecchayā |
bhuktimuktiprasiddhyarthaṁ nīyate sadguruṁ prati || 35 ||
Thus (the Lord) declares in the Mālinīvijayatantra: ʻhe (who) desires
to go to a true teacher in order to attain worldly benefits (bhukti) and

liberation (mukti) is led (to him) by Śiva’s will.”"

teacher. In other words, we are to understand that Sound Reasoning — sattarka — is

rudraśaktisamāveśa.

"" This is one of the two meanings of the expression yuktiyukta. Another is based on a
different usage of the word ‘yukti’. Derived from the root yuj, as is the word ‘yoga’, it
conveys the sense of meditative, yogic practice. Thus, for example, the 112 meditations
taught in the Vijñānabhairava are called ‘yuktis’ as well as dhāraṇās, which is a more
common term denoting a meditative, yogic practice (see above, note 1,774). One who is
‘yukta’ to something is ‘connected to it’ or ‘engaged in it’. Thus, the common
expression ‘yogayukta’ means a person who is deeply engaged in the practice of Yoga.
This is practically what the much less common expression ‘yuktiyukta’ means. So by a
beautiful play of words, ‘that which is sound and reasonable’ — yuktiyukta — is also ‘that

which is engaged in deep meditation.’ Thus, Sound Reasoning means and is two things.

One is engagement in rational thought centred on understanding the teachings, so as to

clarify what is to be adopted and what is to be abandoned in order to progress toward
the goal. It is also the insight of the Pure Knowledge, which is the experience that “I am
all this (that I perceive) and all this am I”. It results from the deep contemplation that is
the culmination of Sound Reasoning, even as it informs it throughout its development,
progressively clarifying unclear concepts. Reason and insight thus work together.

'” MV 1/44bcd. The full passage, i.e. MV 1/42-45, is quoted in 13/199cd-203. Swami

Lakshmanjoo explains: “Bhoga is enjoyment of the universe. Mokṣa [liberation] means
establishment in one’s own Self. As long as there is no bhukti [worldly enjoyment],
mukti [liberation] is not possible. There must be bhoga in mokṣa and mokṣa in bhoga.
Desire is not excluded in Śaivism because it is the expression of Lord Śiva. ʻI want sex,
food etc.” — this gross desire is also included, but only with awareness, not otherwise.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


‘He’ who is penetrated by Rudra’s power and desires to realise his own
(true) nature is led ‘by Śiva’s will’, that is, the power called Jyeṣṭhā, to a true
teacher, and (that power) makes him propense (to accept) a true teacher, so that
he achieves (both) worldly enjoyment (bhukti) and liberation (mukti). Thus, it is

proved that because sound discriminative reasoning and Śiva’s power are not
different, (the stimulus brought about) by sound discriminative reasoning to be
propense to (accepting) a true teacher is that of Śiva’s power itself.
Surely (one may ask,) it is said that ‘it is by Śiva’s will that everyone
becomes propense to (accepting) a true or a false teacher’. Let that just be for a

true teacher (directly), what is (the use of this) sequence? With this doubt in

mind, he says:

Śaktipātas tu tatraiṣa kramikaḥ saṅpravartate |
sthitvā yo ‘sadgurau śāstrāntare vā satpathaṁ śritaḥ || 36 |
There (in that case), the descent of the power (of grace) (śaktipāta) is

gradual (kramika) (for one who), having followed a false teacher or
(some) other scripture, (subsequently) takes to the true path.

‘(Some) other scripture’ means the wrong path (followed by)

Vaiṣṇavas etc. ‘The true pathʼ is a Śaiva teacher and scripture. ‘In that case’,
(when) one follows a true teacher (and scripture) after having followed a false

teacher and scripture.
Surely (one may ask,) agreed that (the people of) this world follow a
true or false teacher or scripture according to (the degree of) the descent of the
power (of grace they receive). What could be wrong (with that view)? But for
what reason are those two (kinds of teachers distinguished as being) true and

false? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TṬRATT
TTHSTTN II
RTT

ckqī
ātra jaaātak
az

a|| 3
The desire for a woman by most people is full of malas [impurities] and so they are
likely to be destroyed. When there is desire without malas [impurities], you wish for a

woman and she is yours at that very moment, without hindrance. That is the Lord’s

desire; the other is desire from the individual mind.’ (personal communication)

' From this perspective, there are two types of descents of the power of grace. One is

direct, that leads directly to a true Trika teacher. Another is gradual, that is, takes place

in stages, as the seeker is led to more than one teacher. Initially, the first teacher may not
even be a Śaivite. But then, by Śiva’s grace, he is led to a true Śaiva teacher. Abhinava,

it seems, is also alluding here to the possibility that the seeker is led by Śiva's grace to
several teachers, from whom he receives initiation into Śaiva schools of progressively
higher levels, until he finally finds one who initiates him into Trika. See below, 13/302

where the Bhairavakulatantra is cited.

TANTRĀLOKA

guruśāstragate sattve ‘sattve cātra vibhedakam |

śaktipātasya vaicitryaṁ purastāt praviviṁcyate || 37 |I

The distinction here between a true or false teacher or scripture
effectively amounts to the variety of the descent of the power (of grace he
has received), which will be explained further ahead.

‘Here’ʼ, in what was said before. (This will be explained) ‘further
aheadʼ in Chapter (Thirteen), that deals with (the varieties of) the descent of the
power (of grace). ! “Ḷhe distinction’ (between them) is the cause of their

difference. In this way, the teachers and the rest that belong to other systems
(darśana) are governed by the (deluding) power of Māyā called Vāmā, whereas
our (teachers are sustained) by the (illumining) power Jyesthā. Thus, this

(particular) person, according to the power' that governs him, is made to
believe there (in that particular teaching).

Nor is this (view) without (the support of scriptural) authority. So he

uktaṁ svacchandaśāstre tat vaiṣṇavādyān pravādinaḥ |
sarvān bhramayate māyā sāmokṣe mokṣalipsayā |l 38 Il
It is said in the Svacchandatantra that those who preach the
doctrines of Viṣṇu etc. are all (deluded and impelled) by Māyā to wander

about (confused) by their desire for liberation in what is not liberation.


(The seeker is) ‘deluded (and impelled)’ (by Māyā) because he adopts
(a view) which is not within (and part of) that (right path). He says that (with the
words): ‘(they are deluded and impelled) by Māyā to wander about
(confused) by their desire for liberation in what is not liberation’. The
intended sense of this reference paraphrased (from the Svacchandatantra) is

what has been said there many times (in various ways). That is said (there):

‘Beyond that” is Māyā that deludes all living beings, their intellect

confused by (Māyā that operates freely) with none to oppose its obstruction

' See below, 13/129cd-310.

' Read yac chaktyaivādhiṣṭhito for tacchaktyaivādhiṣṭhito.

TĀ 4/38cd is a paraphrase of SvT 10/1141cd.
' The Svacchandatantra is describing the world orders (bhuvana) present in the thirtysix principles. Having dealt with the ones below Māyā, it goes on to talk about Māyā
itself. The world orders will be described, mostly on the basis of chapter ten of the
Svacchandatantra, below in Chapter Eight.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


(nirvaira-paripanthinyā). Philosophers argue here (with one another, saying,)
“this is reality, this is not”. Having abandoned the true path, it quickly leads far
away (along) the wrong path. Those low people who are not devoted to the

teacher, deity, fire and the scripture,' who take their support from dry logic,

know (only) the deliberations produced by false reasoning. By (their) desire for
liberation, Māyā makes (them) wander about (confused) in what is not

liberation.
Again,

‘Those others who know Sāṅṁkhya, Veda and the Purāṇas and preach

liberation, and are unable in their settled opinions concerning (those) other

scriptures to go beyond them, are obstructed by Māyā. Deluded (by it, they

wander on a path) whichis not that of liberation, (impelled) by (their) desire for

liberation.

Surely (one may ask,) if this person, be he a Vaiṣṇava or the like, is
deluded by Māyā, because his latent tendencies (sarṁskāra) develop only there

(in that practice and belief), it should not be possible (for him) to descend from

(that) false path. Thus, is it not so that he will never ascend onto the true path?


With this doubt in mind, he says:


azGq #alSfq TāḶHYĪRTTG;|

-TḤ ṀJTqGTRATT |

32 1

yas tu rūḍho ‘pi tatrodyat parāmarśaviśāradaḥ |
sa śuddhavidyāmāhātmyāc chaktipātapavitritaḥ l| 39 ||
ārohaty eva sanmārgaṅṁ pratyūhaparivarjitaḥ |

The same expression is also found in SYT 12/119cd, that says: “Māyā is the Knoṭ
which is hard to traverse because none oppose its obstruction.’ Kṣemarāja comments:
‘‘None oppose it’ means that it has no cause (or purpose). It is Māyā which is the

Supreme Lord's power of freedom. It obstructs by concealing one’s own full (and

complete) nature and generates the limited (individual) perceiver’s nature (in its place).
As that is its nature, Māyā that binds the individual soul is called the Knot.”

Swami

Lakshmanjoo explains

this expression

as follows.

nirvairaparipanthinyā, i.e. it misleads only, it has no purpose in doing so, so this way of
being misled is very difficult to overcome. It is easy to overcome it if one is misled with
purpose, but if one is being misled instead without purpose it is very hard to overcome.
No philosophy has even tried to begin to refuteits doctrines.’ (personal communication)

' Read with TĀ 8/335a gurudevāgniśāstreṣu for gurudevāgniśāstrasya, even though

thisis the readingin the SvT.

' SVT 10/1138cd-1141. Jayaratha has already quoted SYT 10/1139cd-1140 above in his

commentary on 4/17cd-18ab. See note there.
' SVT 12/120-121ab. Kṣemarāja comments: ‘Whatever liberation (there may seem to
be) other than the liberation (achieved) by attaining oneness with Supreme Bhairava,

Who is pure, free and dense (uninterrupted) consciousness, even though it has to some

extent crossed over the path, because the other (remaining) path has not been traversed,

there appears to be liberation in what is not liberation.’

TANTRĀLOKA

However, even though he adheres there (to these inferior systems),
he becomes wise by the emergence of reflective awareness (within him).
Sanctified by the descent of the power (of grace), free of obstacles by virtue
of the greatness of (this) Pure Knowledge, he (ultimately) ascends onto the
true path. (39-40ab)

Again, even though one who, due to the firmmess of (his past) latent

tendencies has developed (in his), for example, Vaiṣṇava (beliefs), he ‘becomes
wise’, that is, skilful (in discerning) the difference between the essence (of the
truth) and what is other than that, as the reflective awareness, which is sound

discriminative reasoning (sattarka), emerges (by degrees). Thus, sanctified by
the governance of the power Jyesthā, ‘by virtue of the greatness of (this) Pure

Knowledgeʼ, which is sound discriminative reasoning,' he ascends onto the
true path which is free of obstacles, and is established in our philosophy
(darśana), by virtue of which he may (attain) liberation directly (sākṣār).
Surely (one may ask,) what is the cause of the emergence of his

reflective awareness? With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Types of Teachers'
The Spontaneously Enlightened (sāṁsiddhika), Uncreated (akalpita)
Teacher

g Taā---āTrīi:
aJ Td Tadd I| `o ||

a 7 ũītatgā: vīā Trk: aaaāīṁ:|
' Puṟe Knowledge is the insight that ‘I am all this (that I perceive) and all this is me’. It

is the ‘sound reasoning’ or ‘discriminating logic’ which counters the undiscriminating
and unsound reasoning (asattarka) that ‘I am the body’. The latter is inevitably a
thought construct, as the body is an object which is defined, as are all objects, in relation

to other objects which it is not. The same holds true for the mind even though it is a
much subtler object.

' In course of the discussion that follows, Abhinava goes on to talk about the various

kinds of teachers (4/40cd to 78ab). He talks about this again below in Chapter Thirteen
(13/129 ff.), that deals with the nature and occasion for a descent of the power of Śiva's
grace. There, as here, Abhinava distinguishes between teachers according to the degree

in which they have been liberated through their personal insight into the essentially
liberated condition of consciousness. In doing so, he also establishes that, as liberation is
achieved only when this knowledge dawns, any other means, whether it is the teacher,
scripture, Yoga, or ritual or any of its constituents, such as Mantra, are not essential. But
from Abhinava's point of view, this does not mean that ritual or any other means should
simply be abandoned. He says this in his introduction to the means based on action, that

he expounds in the following chapter. Purification of thought that leads to the liberated

state of consciousness which is free of it, does not only take place in the sphere of
cognition, which is the domain of the Empowered Means. It may, indeed must, also take

place in the sphere of the lower order of subjectivity identified with the psychophysical

body engaged in Yoga and ritual. This is because neither give rise to knowledge in the

absence of the fundamental discernment that the yogi or the ritual agent are not
essentially the body. This requires discernment grounded in Sound Reasoning.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


sa tāvat kasyacit tarkaḥ svata eva pravartate || 40 ||
sa ca sāṁsiddhikaḥ śāstre proktaḥ svapratyayātmakaḥ |
This (discriminative intuitive) reasoning (tarka) arises thus for some

(spontaneously) by itself (svata eva). And such a one is called in the

scriptures ‘Spontaneously Enlightened’ (sāṅsiddhika), and his nature is

such that he is enlightened by himself (svapratyayātmaka) (without
instruction). (40cd-41ab)

(Discriminative reasoning arises in some cases) ‘by itself’, that is,
independently of the causes well known to all, such as a teacher’s instruction.
(However,) it is not without a cause in all respects, because in actual fact

(vastutaḥ) the Supreme Lord’s descent of the power (of grace) and the like
arises as an alternative instrumental cause. Thus, (such a teacher) is given a

name in our system which accords with its etymological meaning also. ‘And
such a oneʼ etc. who is by himself (svayaṁ) (spontaneously) engaged in (the
discriminative) reasoning (of liberating insight, by virtue of which he is called
a) Spontaneously Enlightened (teacher), that is, one who is so from birth, by
virtue of the perfect accomplishment (saṁsiddhi) (achieved by his enlightened)
reasoning (spontaneously instilled in him by grace). This is the meaning. And it
is said:
‘The great sage who is established in reality, and for whom
independence from the teacher and scripture arises (spontaneously) by itself, is

said to be spontaneously enlightened.”

According to Monier-Wiliams’s dictionary, sāṁsṣiádhika means: ‘effected naturally,

belonging to nature, natural, native, innate, existent, existing by its own nature or
essence, existing absolutely, absolute and effected by supernatural means (as spells
etc.).”

In other words, Sound Reasoning, which purifies thought and results in direct
contemplation of the true nature of the Self and all things as Śiva, can develop
progressively by reflection on the teachings imparted by a teacher or scripture. Or elseit
can develop inwardly by itself in the course of meditation, or at other times by Śiva’s

grace directly. We are reminded that it is commonly accepted, even by the empiricist
Naiyāyikas, that the intuitive insight Yogis develop is a valid source of knowledge,
along with the standard means of knowledge (pramāṇa), such as direct perception,
inference and valid testimony.

' This teacher has accomplished everything by himself spontaneously. In other words,

he is accomplished (siddha) by his very nature or from his own nature (svabhāvataḥ).
Thuṣ, he is ‘properly° (samyak) ‘one who is fully accomplished’, which is the literal
meaning of the term sāṁsiddhika and ‘accords with its etymological meaning’. Here it
is translated as ‘spontaneously enlightened’. Concerning this type of teacher, see also
below, 13/134cd ff.

This reference drawn from a scriptural source demonstrates that the concept of a

svayaṁsāṁsidáhika ʻspontaneously enlightened by oneself’ is not Abhinava’s own idea.

The possibility of a spontaneously enlightened teacher is a feature of the overarching
possibility of direct enlightenment, that we see repeated in various perspectives and

contexts throughout the Anuttara Trika narrative of the Tantrāloka. It finds its scriptural

basis in the Bhairava and Kaula Tantra, specifically the sources Abhinava cites for the
Anuttara Trika. The Siddhāntas, that generally do not promote the possibility of

TANTRĀLOKA

liberation in this life (jīvanmukti) and so do not preach the possibility of spontaneous
realisation, do nonetheless maintain in secondary, indirect ways, moderate links to it.

One area of contact and common discourse are the siddhis (lit. ‘accomplishmentsʼ). In
this context, the ultimate siddhi practically amounts to a form of liberation in which the
liberated soul is equipped to be a teacher, to lead others to the same realisation. While
we do not come across the term svayaṁsāṁsiddhika in the Siddhāntāgamas, we do find
sāṁsiddhika. This is the highest of three types of accomplishment, along with Vainayika
and Prākṛta. We observe in the enumeration of the Dharmika sāṁsiddáhika siddhis the
features of higher illumination, and in the Adharmika, impediments to that. They are
defined as follows in chapter ten of the vidyāpāda of the Saiddhāntika Mṛgendratantra:
siddhikā vainayikāḥ prākṛtāś ca bhavanty aṇoḥ !| 26 ||

viśiṣṭadharmasaṁskārasamuddīpītacetasām |

guṇaḥ sāṁṣiddhiko bhãti dehābhāve ʻpi pūrvavat | 27 |
viśiṣṭeneṣṭāpūrtādidharmasaṁskāreṇa samyag uddīpitaṁ ceto yeṣāṁ teṣāṁ na paraṁ
dehasaṁyoge yāvad dehābhāve ‘pi prāg baddho guṇaḥ prakāśate, sa sāṁsiddhiko nāma
hoddhavyaḥ || 27 || athaitebhyaḥ sāṁsiddáhikādibhyo dharmebhyaḥ phalaviśeṣān

vaktum āha

“(There are three types of qualities) of the individual soul. (They can be)
sāṁsiddhikas, vainayikas and prākṛtas. The quality (guṇa) of those whose minds are

energized by special (excellent) traces of Dharma is said to be sāṅṁsiddhika. It shines, as

(explained) before, even (after death), when there is no body. (10/26cd-27)

Nārāyaṇabhaṭṭa explains: The quality that shines for those whose mind has
been energized by a special (excellent) trace of Dharma, such as the completion of a
sacrifice, fashioned (baddha) previously, is not theirs (only) when (alive and) conjoined
to the body, it is so also when (they are dead and) there is no body.

Now, in order to state the special fruits that come from these sārṁīsiddhika and
other Dharmas, it is said:
svargo muktiḥ prakṛtivāvighātau

yonikrāntir niṛayāvāptibandhau |

rāpeṣv arthā vinayaprākṛteṣu

saṁpadyante ṣavighātāḥ krameṇa || 29 ||

tatra tāvad vainayikeṣu rūpeṣu krameṇārthāḥ saṁpadyanate sphītim upayānti | ke ta ity
āha svarga ityādi, dharmāt svargaḥ,
jñānān muktiḥ, vairāgyāt prakṛtilayaḥ, aiśvaryād

avighātaḥ yatheṣṭasidáhir ity arthaḥ | athādharmāt tiṛyagādiyonikrāntiḥ, ajñānān
nirayāvāptiḥ, avairāgyād bandhaḥ, anaiśvaryād vighātaḥ | 29 II atha
sāṁsiddhikeṣūcyante

Heaven, liberation, (the dissolving away of) Prakṛti, and the absence of
impediments (are attained by Dharma). (Due to Adharma there is) entrance into a
womb, the attainment of hell and bondage. (These) things, with (their) impediments,
accrue respectively in the case of those things that are Vinaya by nature. (10/29)
There (in that case), such things accrue, that is, become clearly manifest,
respectively, in the case of things that pertain to the Vainayikas. What are they? (The
Tantra) says: heaven etc. By Dharma (one attains) heaven, by knowledge, liberation, by


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

Thus he is (dependent only on) himself, not on another, be it a teacher

or anything else. He whose nature™ is the well determined (certainty) which is

the knowledge that ‘this is so’ is referred to in this way.
Surely (one may ask,) elsewhere (in other traditions) it is said that in
order to realise the supreme principle something else, such as a teacher, is
referred to as the cause (of realisation, not just oneself). So how is it that here
(in this school, with regards to this kind of teacher), on the contrary, one’s own
(spontaneous insight) is (said to be) the only one? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

ṇaá r̥dda súra: |

dispassion, the dissolving away of Prakṛti, by mastery (aiśvarya) one is without
obstacles, that is, (one gets) whatever attainment one desires. This is the meaning.

Now, due to Adharma there is entrance into a womb of a bird and the like; due
to ignorance, the attainment of hell, and due to the absence of dispassion, bondage, and
due to the absence of mastery, impediment. Now (what happens in the case of)
sāṁsiddhikas is taught.

vaśyākrāntis tatparījñānayogo
bhogānicchā vighnasaṁghavyapāyaḥ |

bhogāsaktir nyakkṛtir dehalabdhi
vighnaś cārthās teṣu sāṁsiddhikeṣu || 30 ||
dharmādiṣu sāṁsiddhikeṣu satsv idam idaṁ saṁpadyata iti pūrveṇa saṁbandhaḥ | kiṁ
kim Lity atrāha vaśyākrānúr •ityādi,
vaśyakrāntḥ sāṁsiddhikād dharmāt,
tatparijñānāyogas 1tādṛgvidhāj jñānāt, bhogeṣv anabhilāṣo vairāgyāt, vighna-

samīhāpagama .aiśvaryāt, bhogeṣv āsakiḥ sāṁsiáddhikād adhaṁmāt, nyakkṛtr
nyakkāras tathāvidhād ajñānāt, dehalabdhir avairāgyāt, kāryeṣu vighno ‘naiśvaryād iti

I10/3011

Overpowering those who need to be controlled, the Yoga of knowing that
completely, the desire for worldly enjoyments, and the removal of the mass of obstacles
(pertain to Dharma). Attachment to worldly pleasures, humiliation (and contempt), the
‘aṭṭainment of a body” and ‘obstacles” (pertain to Adharma). These are the things that
pertain to those sāṁṅsiddáhika (accomplishments).
When there are sāṁsiddhikas such as Dharma and the rest, the following are
attained. This is the connecting syntax with what was said before. What (are they)? 1)
‘Overpowering those who need to be controlled°- (this is achieved) by sāṁsiddhika
dharma. 2) ‘The Yoga of knowing that completely (is achieved) by that kind of
knowledge (i.e. sāṅsiddhika). 3) The desire for worldly enjoyments (is remedied) by
dispassion. 4) ‘The removal of the mass of obstaclesʼ (is achieved) by mastery.
Due to sāṅsiddhika Adharma (on the contrary, there is) 1) ‘attachment to
worldly pleasuresʼ, 2) ‘humiliation (and contempt) due to that kind of ignorance, 3)

‘the attainment of a body’ due to the absence of dispassion and, 4) ‘obstaclesʼ to the

(completion) of works that need to be done, due to the lack of mastery.”

' Read jñūānamātmāsvabhāvo for jñānamātmā svabhāvo.

TANTRĀḶOKA

kiraṇāyāṁ yad apy uktaṁ gurutaḥ śāstrataḥ ṣvataḥ || 41 I|
tatrottarottaraṁ mukhyaṁ pūrvapūrva upāyakaḥ |
As is said also in the Kiraṇā: “(Śiva should be known) from the

teacher, the scripture and oneself.’” Of these, that which comes later in
this series is primary (mukhya), whereas that which comes earlier serves as
a means to that which follows. (41cd-42ab)

' TĀ 4/41d is KiT 1/9/14b. This quarter verse is quoted again as TĀ 4/78d, where

Abhinava says it is also found in the Niśāṭanatantra. He refers to its source as the

Niśāṭanatantra in TĀ 13/197-198. In his commentary there, Jayaratha obliges us by

quoting the passage in full from that source. This same quarter verse is quoted again
below in 13/162d. The source is named there, as here Kiraṇā (saṁhitā). Abhinava is

fond of referring to this set of three throughout the TĀ in various contexts. (See for
example, 26/5, in the commentary to which Jayaratha quotes the version found in the
Niśātanatantra (i.e. tripratyayam idaṁ jñānam)). Indeed, this seems to be a common

view found in Tantras of various traditions, especially Kaula. So we read, for example,
in the Kubjikāmata (13/58) of the Kubjikā school:

‘If one has seen (directly and understood) all things from the teacher, the
scripture and oneself, then (such a one) is said to belong to the tradition (kramika), or
else he is (himself) equal (in value) to the tradition.”

Again, Abhinava explains this line in the MVV, stressing the primary

importance of scripture, and how its validity is grounded in essentially the same insight

that arises spontaneously within consciousness. He writes:

“The principle (fundamental nature) of one’s own consciousness is made clear
from the teacher, the scripture and oneself. This effort has been primarily made (this
way). The teacher depends on the common practice (vṛ#i) of the scripture, and that is

grounded in one’s own consciousness. Thus all this is accomplished (and proved) by

one’s own consciousness; it is not indeed without help (from consciousness) . . . . Those
whose hearts have awakened constantly are so by the practice of that scripture, and that

scripture is one’s own consciousness and that is not dependent (on anything). If one

explains it that way, one should say that it is (intrinsically) an authoritative mean of
knowledge by itself (svataḥ).’ (2/2267-268, 271cd-272)
Referring again to this line in the Kiraṇatantra below in 13/162, Abhinava

goes on to paraphrase a long section of the Nandiśikhatantra (13/163-195), where it is

explained at length. He then goes on to refer to the Niśātanatantra, which he tells us
states the same (13/197). One of the reasons Abhinava focuses on this passage is
because in it he finds scriptural authority for the view that external initiation is not

essential, at least for those who can achieve spontaneous realisation. One could hazard

to say that Abhinava is also suggesting that it is possible to achieve in this way the goal
of liberation that Śaivism generally maintains is achieved through ritual action,
commencing with the rite of initiation. He maintains that initiation can be imparted
directly by the goddess (see below, 4/63cd-64 and note). Moreover, he also supports the
view voiced in the PT (25abc, quoted below in 4/49-50), that Śiva can impart the
liberating knowledge that bestows the initiated state ‘immediately’ (sadyaḥ). This is a
form of initiation devoid of outer ritual. While the Tantras of traditions that preach the

immediate transmission of enlightened consciousness as one of a transmission of Śiva’s
or (according to the MV and others) Rudra’s intense spiritual power, Abhinava stresses


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


It is said in the scripture (sarṁhitā)' called Kiraṇā that there are three
causes (kāraṇa) (that serve as the means) to know the supreme reality, which is

devoid (śūnya) of the (negative) qualities of Māyā, (where we read):

‘The Void (śūnya) should be known in this way from the teacher, the

scripture and oneself.

Although (this seems to imply that they are of equal status,) what is

meant is that there (in that case,) each subsequent one is primary (with respect
to the one that precedes it). Thus, scripture (is more important) than the teacher,

and (more important than) that also is one’s own insight (svaparāmarśa).

Thus, that which is prior (in this sequence) comes first (as the basis of those that
follow,) just as the teacher is the means (to understanding) the scripture, and
that (is the means to achieving) one’s own insight (svaparāmarśa). In the same

way:

‘it is said that even those things that are to be abandoned are means (if
they are abandoned) in order to adopt (what needs be adopted).”
that this stimulates personal insight, which is the direct means to liberation, as it is the
Pure Knowledge that ‘I am all this (universe) and all this (universe) is me. In other

words, he shifts the focus from power to gnosis.
' The teacher’s instruction is a means to understanding the meaning of scripture,
whereas scripture is the means to attaining one’s own insight. The scripture is more
authoritative than the teacher, and so can overrule what the teacher says, if it does not

agree with scripture. Greater than scripture is one’s own insight. Each serves as a means

to the subsequent one, and so insight that arises within oneself is the highest. The
teacher’s instruction and scripture are secondary with respect to the insight that arises
spontaneously, without any external means. It is the reflective awareness of
consciousness, which is the basis of them all. However, although this is true, we should
note carefully that they do not, and should not, contradict one another. The teacherʼs

instruction is in accord with scripture, and that is in agreement with one’s own insight,
which is sustained and confirmed by both.

' See above, note to 4/25cd-27. There are several ways Śaiva scripture refers to itself.

The best known is ‘Tantra’, which simply means ‘book, and ‘Āgama’, which literally
means ‘what has come’. The term ‘saṁhitā’ literally means ‘put together’. We are

alerted in this way that Tantras (= Āgamas = Saṁhitās) are often compilations. Even a
cursory critical analysis of Tantric texts reveals that they are indeed often ‘compilations’
of passages that may have been written at different times or even by different people.
They may be original or, not infrequently, drawn from other Tantras. By tracing the

origins of such passages, this intertextuality may serve as a means of establishing a
relative dating of the Tantras, and furnish insights into the manner a particular Tantric

system is built up and develops. Moreover, a comparison of the readings of the two or

more sources is a valuable aid for the textual editor.
“Cf. KiT 9/2c (quoted above ad 1/74-75ab (75-76ab)): māyādharmaiḥ śivaḥ śūnyaḥ
‘Śiva (is the Voidin the sense that He is) devoid of the (impure) attributes of Māyā.
KĪT 9/14ab.

' Read yady api for yad api.

The expression svaparāmarśa literally means ‘one’s own reflective awareness’ or

just ‘self-awarenessʼ. In this context the sense is, as I have translated, ‘one’s own

insight’. The expression implies that insight consists of the self-reflective awareness that
perceives one’s own identity with ultimate reality.

TANTRĀLOKA

In accord with the principle (yukti) stated in such passages, the teacher
and scripture are a means (to the attainment of one’s personal insight), and so
are not primary (mukhya) (ones). Thus, one’s own insight (svaparāmarśa) is the
main (and most fundamental one), and so here (in this case) it is that which is

accepted (upādāna) (as the best).

Thus, one for whom (this) reflective awareness (parāmarśa) arises
spontaneously has been made fit in all respects (and every circumstance, to
practice and initiate others). Accordingly, he says:

qT] ārīs̃ aāā: ṂḍdTTITTTIĀTT]
I| 3 1
srfṅtrṁ: aaārcēñfvrtrtēag a: 1

yasya svato ‘yaṁ sattarkaḥ sarvatraivādhikāravān || 42. |I
abhiṣiktaḥ svasaṁvittidevībhir dīkṣitaś ca saḥ |

He in whom this sound discriminative reasoning (sattarka) (arises

spontaneously) by itself is fit in all respects (to perform any ritual, practice

any form of spiritual discipline, and initiate others). He has been both
initiated (as a disciple) and consecrated (as a teacher directly) by the

goddesses of his own consciousness. (42cd-43ab)

' The knowledge that develops from one’s personal insight is the highest. Indeed, the

teacherʼs instruction and the scriptures should be abandoned, if by doing so one

achieves higher levels of realisation and insight than by following them. But even
though they should be abandoned, they continue to be means to realisation, although not
primary ones. The intended meaning, it seems, is not just that personal insight is better

than the teacher’s instruction and that of scripture. Ultimately, the only means to

realisation is one’s own spontaneous reflection, which is free of all means, develops
inwardly by Śiva’s grace, supported by the teacher and the scriptures. A very small

emendation quite feasibly yields the original reading, and with it this meaning, almost
directly. Thus, by reading yady api — ‘although’ for yad api — ‘as is also’ we could
translate:
‘Although it is said in the Kiraṇatantra: ʻ(Convincing insight comes) from the
teacher, the scripture and oneself, of these, that which comes later in this series is more
important (mukhya), while that which comes earlier serves as a means to that which

follows.” To complete the meaning, one may add: “Thus one’s own insight is the

ultimate means to both, and so is effectively in the end the only one.” By this of course
is not meant that one should not have a teacher or learn from scriptures. Rather that they

are effective guides by virtue of one’s own insight that develops by Śiva’s grace, which
as His divine power is the Goddess.

' This verse is quoted below in TĀv ad 15/15cd-16 and 26/15-16. See also below,

13/131cd-142ab. Cf. ‘Therefore, those who have not been pierced with a firm Śāmbhava

descent of the power (of grace), (even so) enter the supreme level of reality once
purified thought by the process (of applying themselves to understanding) the true
scripture and the like. Surely then (one may ask,) is not the supreme principle to this
extent not an object of thought? This is not so, as (this process of purification)

completes its function by just destroying the trace of duality (of dualistic notions). The

supreme principle is everywhere self-luminous as all things. Thought there cannot aid

anybody nor damage them. For one who is penetrated there by a very firm descent of
the power (of grace), Sound Reasoning arises by itself as (and so becomes) a


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


‘He in whom this’ʼ, the previously described ‘sound discriminative

reasoning arises spontaneously independently of a teacher etc. ‘is fit in all
respectsʼ (to practice) Yoga, (receive and give spiritual) knowledge.
Surely (it is said that) ‘there is no competence to practice Śaiva Yoga
without initiation,' so according to this view, how can he have authority in all

respects (to practice) without initiation? With this doubt in mind, he said: ‘he

has been both initiated (as a disciple) and consecrated (as a teacher
directly) by the goddesses of his own consciousness’. (These are) the
functions of his own (forms of) sensory consciousness (indriyavṛtti). They are
the goddesses who illumine the oneness (of the object) with the perceiver, in

accord with the teaching (imparted in the following verse):’

Spontaneously Enlightened (sāṁsiddhika) (teacher), that is, one who is said to be
initiated by the goddesses. We will explain how it comes about progressively in the case

of another (kind of person) in the section in which (the nature) of the descent of the

power of grace (is taught). TSā p. 22-23.
It is not clear who these goddesses are. They may possibly be the goddesses

associated with the goddess Raktā, who bestows this initiation according to the
Brahmayāmala (see below, 4/64). Jayaratha says that the ‘goddesses of consciousness’
are the goddesses of the senses. To understand what the goddesses of the senses are, we

need to turn to Kṣemarāja’s commentary on the Stanzas on Vibration verses 6 and I
that declare:

‘That principle should be examined with effort and reverence, because this, its
uncreated freedom, prevails everywhere; by virtue of it, the senses, along with the inner

circle, (although) unconscious, behave as if conscious in themselves, and move towards
(their objects), rest (there) and withdraw (from them).
Kṣemarāja explains that we should distinguish between two aspects of the
senses. On the one hand, they form a part of the gross, insentient level of emanation, and
yet on the other, they are aspects of Śiva’s power. It is the latter aspect that the esoteric
doctrine (rahasyārtha) of the Krama and other Kaula schools stresses. From this point
of view, the senses, as powers of consciousness, are in fact sentient; but even so,
says
Kṣemarāja, we must distinguish provisionally between these two levels in order to lead

the more spiritually immature to this higher doctrine. He explains that there are two
groups of senses, an inner and an outer one. ‘The outer group consists of the thirteen
senses made manifest by the power of Māyā, as insentient in relation to the individual

soul. The inner group consists of the goddesses of the senses (karaṇeśvarī). These
goddesses are hypostases of the energies or rays of the light of one’s own conscious

nature (maricīcakra). They are thus said to possess a ‘body of consciousness”
(vijñānadeha), and are aspects of its ecstatic nature or ‘wonder’ (ciccamatkāra). . . . The
inner circle of sensory powers generates and withdraws its own object in and through
the act of perception. However, it is coupled with the activity of the outer circle of the

senses in such a way that only the latter appears to be apprehended, and react to its

object, which is felt to be outside it. Ultimately, both groups are impelled by Śiva, one’s
own inherent nature. Thus Śiva can be realised in a moment by the blissful and
effortless means (sukhopāya) of direct introspection — even while the senses are fully

active.” Dyczkowski 1992a: 202-203.

MV 4/6cd, see above note to TĀv ad 1/231cd-232ab (232).

" The Sanskrit reads saṁvittaya indriyavrttāyaḥ, that can be translated as ‘perceptions
that are the activities of the senses’. In the state of bondage in which consciousness is

contracted by its identification with the psychophysical organism, the activities of the

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The functions (vṛrti) that are said to belong to a Mantra of one who

(directs his attention) outside are said to be (the divine) energies (sśakti) of (the

Yogi who directs his attention) inwards.”

The meaning is that by energizing the knowledge and action (of the
senses and mind by an expansion of consciousness), those (goddesses of
consciousness operating through the senses) bestow freedom everywhere (in all
respects).

Thus (the Spontaneously Enlightened teacher) is supremely excellent.

He says accordingly:


Tq TG ūJTaIJĀĪTI| T TGT: JaĪTT: I `3 1
sa eva sarvācāryāṇāṁ madhye mukhyaḥ prakīrtitaḥ || 43 ||
tatsaṁnidhānenānyeṣu kalpiteṣv adhikāritā |
He, amongst all teachers, is said to be the chief one (mukhya). In his
presence, all other (teachers) who have been formed (kalpita) (by other
teachers) are devoid of authority. (43cd-44ab)

‘Of all teachers, that is, of those who, as will be explained, are

‘uncreated-cum-created’ (akalpitakalpaka) and the rest, he is the chief one, and

so in his presence all other (teachers) have no authority to grace others (or do
anything else). This is said (with the words) ‘in his presence’ etc. As he will

say:

‘Just as, according to the dualist (Śaivite schools,) (the fettered souls

who achieve liberation at some point (ādisiddha) and are as they say) ‘liberated
Śivas (muktaśiva) should be considered to be inferior to (Śiva Himself), Who is
such originally (anādisiddha), in the same way, (teachers) who have attained

senses and mind serve to maintain and even increase its contracted state. But when the

insight dawns that consciousness is not a bodily or mental function but rather, on the

contrary, is the cause and foundation of its existence and imparts life and consciousness

to it, everything changes. The activity of the senses and mind expand consciousness by
rendering the perceiver one with the perceived. As its pervasive presence is thus

increasingly recognised, consciousness and all that appears within it is increasingly

experienced as sacred. Moreover, the power of this presence renders all things sacred,
especially the individual contracted consciousness, which is thereby initiated into the

purity of oneness with Śiva and consecrated to infuse this pure, initiated state into
others. Cf. Dyczkowski 1992a: 202.

Mantras, like the senses, derive their power from the vitality (vīrya) of
consciousness, that impels them and gives them life. The Stanzas on Vibration teach
that:

‘Seizing that strength (bala), Mantras endowed with the power of omniscience
(divine consciousness itself possesses), perform their functions, as do the senses of the
embodied.”

' See below, 4/51-53.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


knowledge (in the manner just described) are inferior to (the teacher) who
atṭains this knowledge spontaneously. In (the latter’s) presence (the former)
have no authority, just as the ‘liberated Śiva’ souls (have none in Śiva’s
presence). They keep quiet or, if they are to do anything, they behave according

to his example.”'

Surely (one may ask,) none disagree that one comes to understand the
scripture from the teacher. So how can someone who has no teacher understand
the scriptures? Even if he is engaged by himself in (sound discriminative)
reasoning and takes initiation and the rest, what success (siddhi) can he achieve?

For it is said: “O lady praised by the Heroes, without scripture there can be no
success in initiation and the rest.’ With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Pure Knowledge of Sound Discriminative Reasoning

g gārxi d raād% RGṀĪICa TAT I| I
sa samastaṁ ca śāstrārthaṁ sattarkād eva manyate || 44 ||

Moreover, by virtue of (his) sound discriminative reasoning alone
he grasps the entire purport of the scripture. (44cd)
‘He grasps’ means, he understands.

Surely (one may ask,) how can one understand all the scriptures to this

extent independently of a teacher and the rest? With this doubt in mind, he says:

śuddhavidyā hi tan nāsti satyaṁ yad yan na bhāsayet |
There is no truth that Pure Knowledge does not illumine. (45ab)

Nor is that proved by just reasoning alone, it is also (established) by the
scripture; and so he says:

TdTĀTĀST̄TTGTŪT-ITA
STT |I| #4, I

sarvaśāstrārthavettṛtvam akasmāc cāsya jāyate || 45 ||

cause

(AlI) that (we have said up to now) is implied in the words ‘without

(akasmāt)

in

the

(following

' Below, 4/74cd-76ab. See note there.

passage

drawn

from

the

TANTRĀḺOKA

Mālinīvijayottara:' ‘knowledge of the purport of all the scriptures arises
within him (spontaneously) without cause.’ (45cd-46ab)

‘Thatʼ is the understanding of (the purport of) all the scriptures, which
is the (impelling) instrumental cause for sound discriminative reasoning, and is
‘implied in the words ‘without cause’. This is (the prose order) relationship
(between the words).

Surely, (saying) ‘without a causeʼ is just words (without meaning;

nothing exists without some prior cause), so how is it that he has said that? With
this this doubt in mind, he says:

lokāprasiddho yo hetuḥ so ‘ʻkasmād iti kathyate || 46 ||

sa caiṣa parameśānaśuddhavidyāvijrmbhitam |

A cause that is not commonly known to everyone is what is meant

by the expression ‘without cause’. (In actual fact, the cause in this case is

just) the unfolding of the Supreme Lord’s Pure Knowledge. (46cd-47ab)

It is said that (if something is) ‘without cause’ it has no cause. That is

unreasonable. If that were to be the case, it would either be eternal' or unreal.

Here (in this case), that (kind of teacherʼs enlightened state) must certainly exist

due to some cause, and that is not commonly known to everybody, because (in
this case) the teacherʼs teaching (being imparted) or the like is not seen directly.
Thus, because it is not like that, it is not commonly known to everybody.

(However,) one may infer by its fruits (that the cause) is the Supreme Lord’s

outpouring of Pure Knowledge, by virtue of which his great knowledge, (born)
of the intuitive insight (prātibhaṁ mahājñānam) which has as its object (viṣaya)
all things, may arise independently of the teacher and scripture. As he will say:
‘Again, by the moderately intense (madhyatīvra) (descent of the power
of grace), all ignorance ceases (directly, without the need of scriptures or

teachers). That through which one knows by oneself (svayam eva) that one’s

' MV 2/16cd. Read śrīpūrva- for śrīpūva- The spontaneous arising of an understanding

of the purport of the scriptures is the fifth and highest accomplishment (siddhi) which

characterizes the penetration of Rudra’s energy (rudraśaktisamāveśa). The other four
signs are described below in 13/214-216. Cf. above, 3/292ab-293ab (291cd-292), 4/35
and commentaries.

' An eternal entity has no beginning just as it has no end, so it cannot have a preceding

cause. According to the Vaiśeṣikas, for example, who do not believe in the existence of
God or an impersonal Absolute, everything is made of eternally existing categories of
entities (padārtha) that are the ultimate cause of everything. Three of these are
substance, quality and motion. By ‘substance’ they mean atoms that aggregate to form

physical phenomena, within which qualities and motion inhere. Atoms are eternal and
without a prior cause.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


own Self is (the cause of both) bondage and liberation, is the great knowledge
(mahājñāna) (bor) of the intuitive insight (pratibhā) (that comes by grace),

independently (of the knowledge of the) scriptures or teachers.”'

It is due to the diversity of limiting adjuncts that (teachers are) of many
kinds. Thuṣ, he says:

srai ag zaī faṝūt. aēfīftrs: 1. .9 1

aāīrsī] raaṁqaaīvīṝtza: |

m. Tāī āīērct: 1| #¢ 1
asya bhedāś ca bahavo nirbhittiḥ sahabhittikaḥ l| 47 II
sarvago ʻṁśagataḥ so ʻpi mukhyāmukhyāṁśaniṣṭhitaḥ |
bhittiḥ paropajīvitvaṁ paraḥ prajñātha tatkṛtiḥ || 48 II
There are many types of (teacher, who belong to two principal

categories, namely, those) who need no support (of a teacher or scripture)

(nirbhitti) and (those) who do (sahabhittika). (The latter is of two types,
according as to whether the support is applied) everywhere (sarvaga) or
(partially) to an aspect (aṁśagata). Again, (the latter is of two kinds,
according to whether) the aspect is established in primary or secondary

(mmukhyāmukhya) (sources). The support is essentially dependence on
something else, and that other thing is (one’s own spiritual) insight
(prajñā) or its product (that is, these teachings). (47cd-48)
' Below, 13/130-132ab (130cd-132). Jayaratha implies by quoting these verses that, in
this context, Pure Knowledge arises by Śiva’s grace. Indeed, it is Śv' grace which, as

the Pure Knowledge that “ am all this (universe) and all this (universe) is me”, is the
liberating insight the scriptures and the teacher teach.

'√ Ṛead with Jayaratha and MSs C, J and Jh, paraḥ for parā. The priṇted text of the

verse reads ‘parā prajñāthā’, but Jayaratha comments on the reading ‘paraḥ
prajñārthaḥ’. In order to make the commentary coherent with the text, I have adopted

Jayaratha’s reading to get the meaning: “The support is essentially dependence on

something else and that other thing (paraḥ) is (one’s own spiritual) insight (prajāñā) or
its product (that is, these teachings). If one adopts the first reading, the sentence means:

“The support is essentially dependence on the supreme (consciousness) and the supreme

(consciousness) is (one’s own spiritual) insight (prajñā) and its product (that is, these
teachings).” I have adopted Jayaratha’s reading for the sake of the translation. However,
it is quite likely that he had a faulty reading before him, on which he commented.
Indeed, it makes little sense to identify ‘the other’ on which this teacher depends to

grace his disciples with his own insight, which is internal, not external or ‘other” with
respect to his own consciousness.
' There are two basic kinds of spontaneously enlightened teacher - one who is
‘without support’ (nirbhittika), and one who is ‘with support’ (sahabhittika). The former

has no need at all of scripture, teacher, or any means of realisation, whereas the latter
does take some support from them. Again, the ‘support’ may be total or partial. For

example, some spontaneously enlightened teachers may only need to make use of one
scripture. That is termed ‘partial support’ (aṅśagataḥ). Otherwise, he may consult all
the scriptures, regularly. This is not because he needs to achieve anything more, as he is

TANTRĀLOKA

These are the two main kinds of spontaneously realised (sāṁsiddhika)

(teachers), namely, (one who needs) ‘no support’, that is, who has gone beyond
(niṣkrānta) (having to take any) support (from any means to realisation both for
himself and others). (The other kind) is ‘with support’, that is, has the support
(of other means to liberate others or confirm his own liberated state). Again, (a

teacher who is) ‘with support’ may be associated with all the support or
partially, and so he says ‘(the support is applied) everywhere or (partially) to
an aspectʼ. Again, the one that is partially applied may be established in a
primary aspect or otherwise. These are the three types of (Spontaneously
Enlightened teacher who need a) support. Along with the one that is without
support, there are four (types). Again, there may be many (types), because the
support and its aspects are multiple. Here (in this case), the difference that arises
(bhedollāsa) according to whether (one or other aspect) exists or not, is referred
to with the term ‘support’. ‘The support is essentially dependence on
something else’. The meaning is the support is something that depends on
something else (other than one’s own direct insight). What is (that something)

else? With this doubt in mind, he says: ‘that other thing is (one’s own)
(spiritual) insight (prajñā) or its product (that is, these teachings). ‘Insight’
is one’s own reflective awareness. ‘Its product’ is the scripture produced by

(that) other thing (namely, insight), which explains each particular ritual (and

yogic) practice.
Surely (one may object), as his knowledge arises spontaneously, there is

no other thing on which it is dependent. Fine, let (his) state be the one without

support, what is wrong with that (view)? However, when his state is one with

support, as is being explained, then he would not be one who is spontaneously
enlightened, because by being dependent on something else, his condition

would be that of a (teacher who is) ‘created’ (kalpita)' (by another teacher).

Nor (is it possible to maintain) that the particular (kind with supports) is
already accomplished. He does so only to grace others who are not enlightened. Again,
that support may be primary or secondary; that is to say, his dependence may or may not
be predominant. Thus, along with supreme insight, which is ‘without support’, the main
types are four. Again, there may be many more kinds of such teachers, according to the
nature of the support they use. They may also be of many kinds, as are the endless
number of means to realisation or combinations of them. ‘Its product’, which is
whatever such teachers say, is scripture (see the note 4,158, below).
Reading Abhinava alone, without Jayaratha’s commentary, it is not clear why a

teacher who is spontaneously enlightened by himself may need any support at all. One

explanation may be that, although he is enlightened, he may need some degree of

support from another teacher, scripture, or some other means simply to confirm that his

realisation is authentic, or to maintain himself in that state. While this may be a possible
explanation, it seems more likely that, as Jayaratha explains, such a teacher may need
the support of various means to realisation to grace his disciples. They are not for
himself. The teacher ‘without support’ in this perspective is one who manages to
enlighten his disciple directly by a look or other means of transmitting his enlightened

state into him, without any gross mediating means. The following verses that refer to the

conditions for the possibility of direct realisation, unmediated by any means, may be

taken to indicate that Jayaratha’s explanation is correct. But they may only refer to the
teacherʼs attainment, not that of his disciples.

' See below, 4/10cd-72ab.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


(essentially the same as) the general kind (who is spontaneously enlightened
without support) that has not (yet fully arisen). (If that were s0,) how is it that
(not yet enlightened) he is said to be (spontaneously enlightened) with support?
(In reply to this question,) it is said that here (in this case, he is
spontaneously enlightened) by himself, because sound discriminative reasoning
arises, and so having reduced all bonds to insignificance, the Spontaneously
Enlightened teacher is full of Bhairava’s (liberated) state (bhairavībhāva), and

has accomplished everything within himself. Thus, the remaining observance
(of such a one until he dies) has (as its) supreme (para) purpose solely that of

gracing others (para). As was said before:

‘One who is armed with the sword (of discernment) that cuts through
the weave (tantra) of all restrictions has no other purpose at all than to grace
(others) in the course of the remaining mode of conduct (of his life after

liberation) (śeṣavṛtti).

Again:


“(The people of) this world exert themselves, intent as they are in some

way on their own affairs. They do not act at all for the benefit of others. While
he in whom all the impurity of phenomenal existence has been destroyed has
identified with Bhairava, by virtue of which he is full (and perfect), has clearly
only this (left) to do, namely, (attend to) the well-being of the people of the

There (in that case), he graces those whose consciousness is pure and
are the objects of grace (directly), without (resorting to) any expedient. He
graces them by effecting his same (state in them), by transmitting his own

consciousness (to them) by the mere sight (of his presence) (darśana), free of

assessment (anusaṁdhāna). As was said before:

' The printed text here appears to be corrupt. It reads: asaṁbhavat tatsāmānyaḥ

tadviśeṣo nāma.
' Above, 2/37cdef (38). Note that this and the following quotes are all drawn from


CHAPTER TWO ABOVE, WHICH DEALS WITH NO MEANS. THE SPONTANEOUSLY ENLIGHTENED
--------------------------------------------------


teacher has attained his liberated state without the use of any means to realisation.

Although four kinds of teachers of this sort are enumerated here, they all attained

liberation following the ‘pathless path’ of No Means, when the insight (pratibhā) which
is Pure Knowledge (sśuddhavidyā) becomes operational at the highest stage of
development of Sound Reasoning. The power of insight of the most intensely graced

soul is so great that, as the most excellent spontaneously enlightened teacher, he does
not even need a teacher. But he will need to take recourse to the many various means to
realisation to enlighten those disciples who are not pure enough to ‘be here now’.

' Above, 2/39.
' The term ‘anusaṁdhāna’ is derived from the ‘sandh’, which means ‘to connect

together’. It denotes a kind of meditative concentration which, as the form of the word
suggests, ‘connects together’ the meditator with his object, and those with others, to

form a unity by integrating the elements of experience into consciousness. The term
appears several times, for example, in the SŚivasūtra. One sūtra (1/6) reads:
‘śakúicakrasaṁdhāne viśvasaṁhāraḥ’ that is, by contemplating (= ‘connecting
together’) the Wheel of Energies (of self-awareness), the universe (of thought

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Those whose consciousness is pure and behold him also become of his
same nature by (his) transmission of that nature (to them). Such is the extent of

his grace!”

It is with this intention that this (teacher) is said to be one without

support (nirbhittika), because he does not depend on anything else (apart from
his own realised state of consciousness) to grace others also. But, on the

contrary, with respect to those whose consciousness is impure, he graces with
(some) expedient, such as the assessment (anusaṁdhāna) that ‘he is in this

manner an object of my grace’. Here (in this case), all (his) activity (pravṛtti)
depends on external aids for him to successfully grace another person. As was
said before:
‘However, if by the power of his freedom he wishes to grace those

whose consciousness is not pure also, even he should take recourse to the

procedure we are about to explain.”'

Again:


‘Moreover, although he is the Supreme Lord, for that purpose (that is,
gracing others), he also (should continue to) respect (the practice) of
contemplating and listening to the scriptures etc. that are the means to that

(identification with Bhairava).

The recipients of grace are varied (and diverse) also when their

consciousness is impure, and so because (of their variety), in accord with their
particular intentions (and needs) (āśaya), the expedients are also endless. And

so is the scripture that explains that is required by all (of them), otherwise (he
cannot) manage to grace others. As is said:

‘O fair-faced lady, there are (various) differing scriptures because

peoples minds differ, just as there are (various) differing powerful herbs

because diseases differ. Just as having known (just) one herb, it does not serve
as medicine everywhere (in all cases), in the same way, the teacher (cannot
dispense his grace) everywhere (in all cases) taking the support of (just) one
means.
The intended sense (of this passage is that this is the case in which the
teacher needs to apply a support to transmit his grace) everywhere (sarvaga) (in
all cases). There are some (particular teachers) also who, taking just one
(particular) fixed scripture as (his) authority, grace those who are fit to be

constructs) is withdrawnʼ. The teacher in this case transmits his own state of
consciousness to his disciple directly, without the mediation of anything, even the
contemplative reflection that assesses and thus ‘connectsʼ, the content of which we are

informed a few lines further ahead is, ‘in this manner an object of grace’.

'l Above, 2/40.
'“ Above, 2/44.
'“ Above, 2/46.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


graced. This is what is said to be his (partial use of) an aspect (aṁśagata) (of the
manifold means to realisation). As he will say:

‘Itis taught (in that scripture) that a teacher is (of five) kinds. (He may
be a teacher) who knows (just some particular ritual) procedure (used to worship
a deity for a specific purpose) (kalpa); ' (he may be) one who knows a (large)

collection of them; (he may be one who) knows (those of a particular corpus of)

scripture (śāstra), (or) knows the meaning of (just one) Āgama (saṁhitā), or one

who knows the contents (artha) all the scriptures.

‘(The teacher) whose knowledge of a (corpus of) scripture (śāstra) is

well practiced may explain it, not another.

Each subsequent corpus of scripture (śāstra) and parts thereof, is more

primary (than the one that precedes), and the others are secondary. In this

way, in accord with (the following) view, the primary and secondary (scriptures,

from our point of view) are declared (to be as follows):

‘After the Veda comes Śaiva (i.e. Śaivasiddhānta), then Vāma (the
Tantras of the Left Current), then Dakṣa (the Tantras of the Right Current), then

Kula, then Mata, and then after that also comes Trika which, the best of all, is

supreme.

As one who is spontaneously enlightened, (this teacher’s) state is not
compromised even in this way by his attending to other (means), because within

himself he has by himself done (all that) needs to be done, and because he
requires that for the benefit of others (not for himself). As was said before:

' Note the use of the term ‘kalpa°. The term ‘kalpa’ is used in the context of Vedic

ritual to denote ‘a sacred precept, law, rule, ordinance (= vidhi, nyāya), manner of
acting, proceeding, practice (especially that prescribed by the Vedas). (MonierWilliams) The term is used in Tantras to denote particular procedures to worship
specific deities. Substantial sections of a Tantra may be dedicated to such ‘kalpasʼ. A
striking example is the Jayadrathayāmala where many kalpas are prescribed for the
worship of numerous forms of Kālī.
Again, by extension, an entire Tantra may be called a Kalpa, in which case it is
practically another of the many synonyms for a tantric text. An example is the published
Ākāśabhairavakalpa. Despite the name, it is not especially concerned with the worship
of Ākāśabhairava, but rather deals with matters relating to magical potions and

medicinal herbs.
' Below, 28/386cd-387ab. Abhinava is drawing from the Devyāyāmala. Jayaratha
quotes the corresponding passage in his commentary there.

' Below, 28/387cd. Read, as Jayaratha does, nānyo ‘tha for nānyathā. This line may

also be drawn from the Devyāyāmala.

' Another way to understand this distinction is, as we have seen (above, 4/41cd-42ab),

the scripture is primary with respect to the teacher, and insight is primary with respect to
the scripture. The others are, correspondingly, secondary.

'“ This verse is also quoted in PTv p. 92, along with analogous ones from the Niśācāra
and Sarvācāra. Similarly, when it is quoted below ad 13/300cd-301, it is accompanied

by the same verses from those two sources, that thus together form a standard set.

TANTRĀLOKA

“(This can do him no harm.) Nothing in any circumstance compromises
him, free as he is. (And he should apply himself in this way because) the soul
whose consciousness is not pure cannot have grace without a means (to

realisation).”

Thus, his status is that of one who is spontaneously enlightened,
because he is not dependent in himself (for himself) on anything else. Thus,
what was said is reasonable.

Nor is this said just as our own idea. Thus, he says:


JGaTsaīsad a: #irgTī āīāā |
a ftfzzrvvīāFrcā
a ar a = zṝa: 1 +8

ṭaīṁ vraf=fa īṁ ztr̄Tāraṁa1 uo 1
adrṣṭamaṇḍalo ʻpy evaṁ yaḥ kaścid vetti tattvataḥ |

sa siddhibhāg bhaven nityaṁ sa yogī sa ca dīkṣitaḥ l| 49 ||
evaṁ yo vetti tattvena tasya nirvāṇagāminī |
dīkṣā bhaved iti proktaṁ tac chrītriṁśakaśāsane || 50 ||

It is said in the (Parā)triṁśikā" that: “Whoever knows (this
reality)” as it truly is (tattvataḥ) is always successful (siddhibhāk), even

though he has not (been initiated and so has not) seen the maṇḍala. He

indeed is a (true) yogi and initiate.’ " ‘“He who knows (reality) thus as it
truly is has the initiation that leads to Nirvāṇa!”” (49-50)
'“ Above, 2/47.
'” Abhinava refers to the PT here as ‘triṁ5ik

sana. The metre does not allow any

confirms by referring to it in the feminine ‘ri

ā. The feminine, which involves the

adjustment and so must be accepted as the ori

reading, which Jayaratha partially

lengthening of the final short ‘A’, does not fit the metre. But it is permissible in

compounds to shorten long final vowels. This has been lengthened in translation, as
Jayaratha would have it.
'”" From the context we know that the PT is referring here not just generically to
ultimate reality, but also specifically to the seed-syllable of the Heart (hrdayabīja), that
is, SAUḤ, the basic Trika seed-syllable Mantra of the goddess Parā.

' PT verse 19. Generally, a teacher who imparts initiation is necessary in order to

receive it. The Tantra says that initiation can also be imparted directly by Bhairava,
without the mediation of a teacher. Thus, in those exceptional cases, neither an external

initīation nor a teacher are necessary. The verse primarily alludes to initiation by

referring to the seeing of the Maṇḍala, as that is the culminating moment of the rite of
initiation. But this is not all. Abhinava does say that the Maṇḍala meant here may be the
external Trika Maṇḍala made of one or more Tridents and lotuses. However, he supplies
other explanations of what is meant here by the word maṇḍala, corresponding to two
other means to realisation. Thus, Maṇḍala is also the assembly of deities that is ‘seen’ in
the course of intense ‘violent union’ (hathamelāpa) between Kaula practitioners and

Yoginīs, their partners, in the Kaula rites performed at night, as a part of their
disciplined practice (caryā). Again, the word ‘maṇḍala’ may also refer to the


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

(One who,) because he has been graced by the supreme descent of the

power (of grace), does not need a teacher etc., and so has ‘not seen the

maṇḍala’, which stands for (all the) ancillaries to the external (rite of)
initiation, and the sacrificial rite etc., and so, even though he is such, he has the
initiation that leads to Nirvāṇa which is free of doubt and devoid of the fire
offerings of sesame and clarified butter (that are made in the course of the

external rite of initiation). Whoever (spontaneously) by himself in this very
same way knows his own Self according to its own true nature, because it does
not assume (any specific) qualities (viśeṣānupādānāt) (as does the false, limited
Self), is initiated by the goddesses of his own consciousness. (They do this by)
first destroying the fetters (that bind him, and so) make him (a fit) vessel (to
receive) the knowledge of his own true nature (svātmajñāna). Thus, he is

always ‘a yogi’. Even when he rises from contemplation, he is one with the

Supreme Lord (paramesśvaikātmyavat).' Thus he is ‘successful’. Although he

is still alive (in the body), he possesses (that supreme) accomplishment (siddhi)
which is liberation. This is said in the venerable treatise (called) (Parā)triṁśikā.

assemblage of primary and secondary Wheels (cakra) in the subtle body, including
those of the senses and mind, made of the channels of the vital breath (nāḍī), the yogi
‘sees’ as part of his yogic practice. Abhinava explains that the maṇḍala in any of these
three senses does not need to be seen, that is, experienced, to be initiated and achieve
realisation, if one receives the highest form of the deity’s grace. As he says: “Whoever

has been favoured by a descent of the supreme power ‘knows’ in this way that initiation
is nothing but this knowledge and that there is no other initiation than that. Knowing
this, he is an initiate (initiated directly) by the omnipresent and venerable Bhairava.’

PTy p. 252-253.

' PT verse 26abc, also quoted below in TĀ 13/152cd-153ab. The complete verse says:

‘He who knows this in truth has (received) the (true) initiation that, devoid of (outer

offerings) such as sesame seeds, clarified butter and the like, is free of doubt and leads
to Nirvāṇa.
The initiation that leads to Nirvāṇa (nirvāṇadīkṣā) is the Śaiva initiation in the

most basic sense, here understood to bestow instantaneous liberation in this life

(jīvanmukti). The reader is referred to a previous publication for an outline of the Śaiva
rites of initiation (Dyczkowski 1992a: 235 ff.). Commenting in the PTv (p. 259) on
these lines, Abhinava pertinently quotes the Stanzas on Vibration (verse 32), where its

says:

‘This alone is the attainment of the nectar of immortality, this indeed is to catch
hold of oneself, this is the initiation of Nirvāṇa, that bestows Śiva’s true nature.” ‘Other
initiationsʼ, he goes on to say, ‘may bestow worldly benefits (bhoga), but the true
initiation (that bestows liberation) is only this knowledge. Thus this (Trika) school is
superior to all the others.’ anyā api dīkṣā bhogān vitareyurapi etatparijñānameva tu
tattato dīkṣeti tata evātra sarvottaratvaṁ. Cf. below. 4/60cd-62ab and note.

'” Literally ‘he possesses oneness with the Supreme Lord.' The word ‘yogin’ (English

‘yogi’) literally means ‘one who is in union’. Initiation is basically a ritual procedure
whereby the teacher first removes the binding impurities from the disciple’s soul. Then,
once the limitations have been removed, the disciple’s soul is essentially the same pure
consciousness as that of the deity. Thus, it can easily unite with the Deity. The same can
happen directly by the grace of the energies, that is, goddesses, of consciousness.
Liberated in this way, he is mostly literally a ‘yogin’.

TANTRĀLOKA

The point is that this (view) is not without (the support of scriptural) authority.

There (we read):


‘(Whoever knows (this reality) as it truly is (tattvataḥ) is always

successful (siddhibhāk)), even though he has not (been initiated and so has not)

seen the maṇḍala. (He indeed is a (true) yogi and initiate). ”

The following line says, ‘By having just known that, (he is known by all

the energies).’" Although this line follows, it is not quoted because it not
relevant to matter (discussed here). As he has not seen the maṇḍala, it follows
that he does not (offer) sesame seeds, clarified butter and the rest, and so that
(line which follows where this is said) has also not been quoted.

He also has another name. Thus, he says:


akalpito gurur jñeyaḥ sāṁsiddhika iti smrṛtaḥ |
One should know that the teacher who is (called) Uncreated

(akalpita) s (also) called Spontaneously Enlightened.” (51ab)

The teacher who is called Spontaneously Enlightened in our scriptures
(śāstra) should be known to be Uncreated, because he has not been produced by
another teacher. Thus he can also be designated by the word ‘uncreated’. This is
the meaning.
Having described the uncreated teacher in this way, he (now) talks
about another (kind of) teacher as related to that one.
The Uncreated-cum-created (akalpitakalpaka) Teacher

JTq], āgTāTcaāṁīTardrd: ŪT fē-- I| ug 1

yas tu tadrūpabhāgātmabhāvanātaḥ paraṁ vinā || 51 II
śāstravit sa guruḥ śāstre prokto ‘kalpitakalpakaḥ |

The teacher who has that nature (of a Spontaneously Enlightened
teacher) and knows the (ultimate purport of the) scriptures by

' PT 19a. The remaining part of the verse has been added in brackets.
' PT 20a. The remaining part of this line has been added in brackets.

CHAPTER FOUR DEALS WITH THE EMPOWERED MEANS, WHICH IS BASED ON THE ACTIVATION OF
--------------------------------------------------


the power of knowledge. This is set in operation in accord with the developing descent

of Śiva’s power of grace. As it grows, the innate intelligence (pratibhā) of

consciousness comes to the fore, thus incrementing the capacity for intuitive, creative
and discerning insight, i.e. Sound Reasoning (tarka). It is this which, when well
developed, is the cardinal characteristic of true teachers. Accordingly, Abhinava deals
with their gradations and types there. The highest kind of teacher is graced by such an
intense form of it that he is spontaneously enlightened.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


contemplating his own true nature (ātmabhāvanā) without (taking recourse

to) another (teacher) is said in the scriptures to be one who is ‘uncreated-

cum-createdʼ (akalpitakalpaka). (51cd-52ab)

Again, (there may be a teacher) who has the nature of a spontaneously

enlightened (teacher) but even so the insight (he possesses that has) arisen by
itṣelf is not completely full (and perfect) to that degree. (However,) by the
power of the contemplation of his own true nature (ātmabhāvanā) in accord
with the dictum (of the scriptures that) ‘I myself am the supreme soul
(haṁsa),'" independently of ‘another’ teacher etc., he ‘knows the (ultimate
purport of the) scriptures’ʼ. In our scripture that teacher is called ‘Uncreated-

cum-createdʼ (akalpitakalpaka). This is because (on the one hand his) insight is

attained spontaneously and so is ‘uncreated’, (but he is also ‘created’) because
(he is) formed ‘by contemplating his own true nature’, that is, by the
progressively developing experiential
knowledge of the
scripture
(śāstravedanakrameṇa).
Like the spontaneously enlightened (kind of teacher, this one) also is of
many kinds. Thus, he says:

TJṬ STa]Ṭ SŪFFPTĀTTṬTT;:I 42 II
tasyāpi bhedā utkṛṣṭamadhyamandādyupāyataḥ || 52 ||

There are various types of the latter, according to whether the

means (that is, the grace he has received,) is intense, moderate or weak.

(52cd)

‘The meansʼ is the descent of the power (of grace this teacher has

received).

'” The reader will recall that at its most developed level, Sound Reasoning is

contemplation (bhāvanā) (4/14). To be more specific, it is the contemplation of one’s
own pure conscious subjectivity as one with Bhairava. The Spontaneously Enlightened

teacher became such as his consciousness was free of the impurities of thought, and so,

the object of an intense descent of the power of Śiva’s grace, he entered the liberated
state of No Means consciousness, without any mediating means. Thus, he is ‘uncreated’.

However, if he does not receive access to the perfect and complete plenitude of
consciousness, he must make up the rest of the distance by purifying the remaining
conceptualization (vikalpa) that is contracting his consciousness. This, as we have seen,
is essentially doubt or the limited conception of his true Śiva nature, due to the principle

of Attachment, along with its accompanying constraint. Once this process is complete
and his unclear thoughts become complete, clear and transparent to the underlying
unconditioned expanded consciousness of the supreme perceiver, he is identified with
the teacher, and so fully realised. Thus, he is also ‘created’, that is, fashioned into a
teacher by this process of purification, and so this kind of teacher is called ‘uncreatedcum-createdʼ.

'"” ṢVṬ 4/339c. Also quoted below ad 12/4. The full line states. ‘I myself am the

supreme soul (haṅsṣa), Śiva, the supreme cause’ aham eva paro haṁsaḥ śivaḥ

paramakāraṇam SṆṬ 4/399cd.

TANTRĀLOKA

Well then, (one may ask,) is the contemplation of his own true nature
(ātmabhāvanā) the sole occasional cause (nimitta) by which (such a teacher)

can complete the knowledge that is developing (pravṛtta) (within him) by
himself, or is there some other one also? With this doubt in mind, he says:

JTHĀTTĪSJ
JṬ SATTINSTITRTTHĪRTĪRT : |
JĪTRJHTTTĪCITĀĪṬTar HGTHId̄: II u3 1
bhāvanāto ‘tha vā dhyānāj japāt svapnād vratād dhuteḥ |
prāpnoty akalpitodāram abhiṣekaṁ mahāmatiḥ || 53 |I
A man of great intellect (and resolve) (mahāmati) (who is such by

virtue of the practice of) creative contemplation (bhāvanā), meditation
(dhyāna), the repeated recitation of mantra (japa), (yogic) sleep (svapna),

(by observing a) vow (vrata) (or offering) oblations, receives (this)
uncreated (akalpita) and noble consecration.

This great man of knowledge (mahājñānin) (who has become such) by
virtue of the glorious power of the endless number of means, including
contemplation and the rest, (but) has not been made (a teacher) by some other
teacher etc.,'" receives (this) ‘uncreated’ and hence ‘noble’, that is, great,

' Ṣee below, 13/152cd-53ab. In other words, it is not necessary in some cases to take

initiation from a teacher. A person who is fit to receive it may get it directly from the
Deity (65-69), or even, as Abhinava says here, by his spiritual discipline. But, of course,

those who cannot manage alone without scripture or teacher must seek them out and

practice what they prescribe (69cd-70ab). Abhinava goes on to list the SYM along with
the Vājasanīya, Sarvavīratantra and Brahmayāmala as authorities for this view, which
would generally be considered heretical and unacceptable. Another possible translation

could be:

‘A man of great intellect (and resolve) (mahāmati) receives (this) uncreated

(akalpita), noble consecration (by various means, including), contemplation (bhāvanā),
meditation (dhyāna), the repeated recitation of mantra (japa), (yogic) sleep (svapna),
(by observing a) vow (vrata) and (offering) oblations.”
My translation follows Jayaratha’s commentary. Abhinava himself in the
following verses makes it clear that spiritual practices of this sort develop the adept’s
capacity for liberating insight and that insight itself. However, the consecration

(abhiṣeka) into the status of a teacher is not due to them directly. If that were so, there

would be no need of a consecration at all. Anybody could attain the status of a teacher
by virtue of their practice alone. Ultimately, there would be no need of teachers or,
indeed, the initiation they impart. But this is not so. The teaching is not that there is no
need of initiation. The point is that in certain exceptional cases, when the adept’s

spiritual intellect is exceptionally well-developed through spiritual discipline, he may

receive an intense descent of the power of grace directly from the deity, and so receive

the most excellent and ‘noble’ consecration. Abhinava calls it ‘uncreated’, because it is
not done by man, not because it is not done at all.
!! Jayaratha understands that a teacher who is ‘uncreated’ is not formed (kalpita) by

another teacher. Thus, this status could be attained by anybody who practices meditation


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


‘consecration’.'” The meaning is that he has the authority (to transmit) the

knowledge of the scriptures etc. (even without having been initiated by a
teacher).

or even Mantra, without a teacher. However, an ‘uncreated’ teacher, that is, a
spontaneously enlightened one, is such without the use of any means to realisation at all.

He is such purely by Śiva’s grace. Although any progress at all, in any way at any level,
is entirely due to Śiva’s grace, who wills it so, apart from the case of the spontaneously
enlightened who are graced by No Means (anupāya), which is the highest grace, this

same grace, although less intense, operates through some means to realisation. Those
that Abhinava lists as examples, including meditation, involve some degree of
cogitation — kalpana — they are conceived or formed (kalpita). They also serve to form
the teacher, and so he is ‘created’. Ultimately, they consecrate him directly as an
enlightened teacher without the mediation of another teacher, and so he is also
‘uncreatedʼ.
The important point Abhinava is making by these distinctions is that it is quite
possible to develop spiitually in
i all these practices without having to be initiated. This
is because progress is the result of Śivas grace. Śiva is
i free to grace anybody at any
time. It depends entirely on His own will to do so. Śiva is not constrained by an factors
or conditions. Simply because a person has receivedinitiation does not mean that Śiva
muṣt grace him with progress in the practices into which he has been initiated.

Conversely, Śivais not obliged to ignore those who have not takeninitiation. One might

think that a distinction can be made between the practice of meditation and the like,

which does not involve Mantra and hence does not require initiation, and those practices

that do require it, as the Mantra is normally given to a disciple by his teacher. But

clearly Abhinava does not agree. He tells us in the Tantrasāra that initiation is only
necessary for those who need to perform or participate in rituals to achieve liberation.

The first part of the Tantrāloka up to Chapter Fifteen (and the Tantrasāra up to Chapter
Eleven) teach practices that do not require the performance of outer rituals. Thus, he
says right at the beginning of Chapter Eleven of the Tantrasāra:
tatra yãvat idam .idam uktam tat sākṣāt kasyacit apavargāptaye
yathoktasaṁgrahanītyā bhavati kasyacit vakṣyamāṇadīkṣāyām upayogagamanāt .iti
dīkṣādikaṁ vaktavyam ḷ
“Well then, there (in that regard), it is said that it is the case that, in accord with

teaching imparted in the compendium (of the Tantras called Tantrāloka), the initiation
that is about to be taught has become useful for some (who cannot manage otherwise),
in order for them to attain liberation. Accordingly, initiation and the rest (of the rituals)
should (now) be taught.”

But even then, one would suppose, in the light of what he is saying here, there

may be exceptions. Note that he is not saying that no one needs to be initiated — the
category of teachers who are ‘created’ (kalpita) have become so by means of initiation.
This is, no doubt, the great majority. True to his Kaulism, which abjures rules and

regulation, sustaining instead intense determination to attain realisation, Abhinava wants
to leave every possibility open. He is supported in that by the Śaiva emphasis on the
power of grace, the absolute, independent status of which he safeguards by ridding it of
all provisos and any other considerations.
' ṛhe word translated here as ‘consecration’ is abhiṣeka, which literally means
‘sprinklingʼ. It denotes the rite by which a teacher initiates his disciple into the status of
a teacher by sprinkling him with consecrated water or other liquid. The texts thus

distinguish ‘initiation’ — dīkṣā — into the status of a disciple, from ‘consecration’ —
abhiṣeka — into that of a teacher.

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask,) what is the authority (that establishes that) the

number of means (nimitta)' to attain knowledge, that is, contemplation and the
rest, are endless? With this doubt in mind, he says:

it--vFĀPITĀ FRILTAĀ!

rāī ṀṀ--̃ TEI I VYII
śrīmadvājasanīye śrīvīre śrībrahmayāmale |
śrīsiddhāyām idaṁ dhātrā proktam anyatra ca sphuṭam || 54 II
The Benefactor has stated this clearly in (a number of scriptures,

including)

the

venerable

the

venerable

Viīra

(i.e.

Sarvavīratantra), the venerable Brahmayāmala, the venerable Siddhā (i.e.

Siddhayogīśvarīmata), and elsewhere.

(The Benefactor has said) ‘this’, namely that there are endless means,
such as contemplation, (to attain knowledge, independently of a teacher).

Although this is said in many scriptures, he quotes the venerable

Sarvavīra first of all in order to introduce (the topic).

' The term nimitta literally means an instrtumental cause, occasion, or a reason. Here it

can be safely translated as ‘means'. The most basic term denoting a means to realisation

is ʻupāya’. Perhaps Jayaratha does not want to use this term, as it may also denote a
category of means in general (as for example, in the expression ‘Śāmbhavopāya), rather

than just one particular means.

' See below, 13/143cd ff., where the passage in Vājasanīyatantra is quoted, regarding

self-consecration into the status of a teacher.
' All the following Tantras that affirm that one can be consecrated by the deity directly

are Tṛika Tantras, except the Brahmayāmala. Below (13/143cd-145), Abhinava
practically repeats this statement, mentioning the Sarvavīra and the Brahmayāmala as

teaching the same, but does not refer to the Siddhātantra. Indeed, the recovered
recension of the SYM is silent about the possibility of self-initiation.
' In 13/143cd-144, Abhinava quotes a reference from the Vājasanīya to a rite in which
the aspirant initiates himself. This is in accord with 4/54, where Abhinava lists this
Tantra along with the Sarvavīra, Brahmayāmala and Siddhā as teaching that a person
may initiate himself. In 4/62cd-64, Abhinava describes how this is done according to the

Brahmayāmala. He quotes the Sarvavīra and the other named sources as authorities for
the view that Śiva is completely free to grace anybody, anywhere and at any time as he
wishes unconditionally. This implies, in this context, that the saving grace that impels

and eṣsentially imparts liberating initiation may descend on a person freely. Abhinava
will argue his case extensively and in detail against a hypothetical Siddhāntin opponent
in the first half of Chapter Thirteen, which is dedicated primarily to teaching the nature

of empowering grace (śaktipāta) (see below 13/1-128). Here the many possible means

to liberation are presented as another indication that the Lord is free to grace the fettered

soul in any number of ways.
After Abhinava lists the four Tantras in TĀ 4/54, he then proceeds to quote

from them. If he is quoting all four, i.e. the Vājasanīya, Sarvavīra, Brahmayāmala and
the Siddhayogeśvarīmata, one would expect him to do so in the same serial order as he
lists them. Indeed, this is certainly so in the case of the last two (i.e. the BY and the


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


SYM) that Abhinava takes the trouble to name. Unfortunately, he does not help us with

the previous two citations.
If they are quoted in the same serial order he lists them, we would expect the
first citation to be from the Vājasanīya. However, according to Jayaratha, the source of
the first citation is the Sarvavīra (55-57ab), and the second the Brahmayāmala (57cd-

58). Thusṣ, according to him, Abhinava quotes the latter twice — once here, and then

again in 4/62cd-64, where Abhinava himself tells us he is quoting from there. In the first
instance, Tōôrzṣôk (1999: xli and 219) follows Jayaratha, at least in his saying that the
identification is incorrect. However, Jayaratha identifies the first reference to be from
the BY, which is wrong. In fact, there can be no doubt that Abhinava is quoting from the
Sarvavīra in the first instance. This is because Abhinava quotes and names the source of

4/55-57ab in the ĪPVY (3 p.106). There he introduces it by telling us that it is ‘as stated
in the venerable Sarvavīramata’ (yathā uktaṁ śrīsarvavīramate). Iṭ reads:

kadācid bhaktiyogena karmaṇā dīk
saṁsṣāriṇo ʻnugr̥hṇāṭi‘Sometimes (the Lord) graces those subject to transmigration by means of the

Yoga of devotion, (ritual) action or by means of initiation also.”

Abhinava quotes every word of this short passage in TĀ 4/55-57ab,
introducing it and interspersing it with his own comments, as follows:
tasya svecchāpravr̥tatvāt kāraṇānantateṣyate |
kadācid bhaktiyogena karmaṇā vidyayāpi vā || 55 ||
jñānadharmopadeśena mantrair vā dāīkṣayāpi vā |
evam ādyair anekaiś ca prakāraiḥ parameśvaraḥ || 56 II
saṁsāriṇo ʻnugṛhṇāti viśvasya jagataḥ patiḥ |

‘The causes (of liberation) are considered to be countless because they are
impelled by (Śiva’s) own will. Sometimes (the Lord graces the individual soul) by
means of the Yoga of devotion, (ritual) action (karman) or knowledge (vidyā) also,
by instructing (in the ways of) righteousness (dharma) and wisdom (jñāna), or by means
of mantras or initiation also. By these and numerous other ways the Supreme Lord, the
governor (pati) of all the universe, graces those subject to transmigration.’ (55-57ab)
Abhinava presents a passage from the Vājasanīya, that one would expect him
to do here, in TĀ 13/143cd-144. It describes a simple rite whereby the adept can

consecrate himself by himself. It goes so far as to admit that he can do so mentally,
without having to perform any outer ritual. Jayaratha quotes a lengthy passage from the

Sarvavīra in TĀv ad 12/24cd. Abhinava quotes the same passage in the PTy p. 235-236,
saying it is from the Sarvācāra. Thuṣ, it would appear that they are two names for the
same text, as Sanderson believes. However, be that as it may, there is no clear direct

evidence that Jayaratha had access to the Sarvavīra. Thīs is because the quotation he
supplies in his commentary here does not appear to coincide with Abhinava’s reference,

and so he may well not have identified the source correctly. Thus, despite the variant

name, which may suggest that Jayaratha did have a copy of the text, he could simply
have been quoting Abhinava’s citation and covering his tracks. In short, Jayaratha’s

identification of 55-57ab as the Sarvavīra is not certain. Indeed, the two brief quotations
he presents in his commentary on 55-57ab do not match with 55-57ab. Moreover, while
Jayaratha may correctly have identified the Sarvavīra, it is not at all certain that he has

identified the following citation correctly as the Brahmayāmala, which we know he

TANTRĀLOKA

Tīa īTrTTTI] PRTTHTTTHT |

a'oṃ fērazaṁ arī 1 u., u
JTTeHĪTCṢIT

TJTTTĪhg JTēī.: TTHT; I| U5, |I

faza srai fā |

tasya ṣvecchāpravṛttatvāt kāraṇānantateṣyate |
kadācid bhaktiyogena karmaṇā vidyayāpi vā ll 55
jñānadharmopadeśena mantrair vā dīkṣayāpi vā |
evam ādyair anekaiś ca prakāraiḥ parameśvaraḥ || 56 ||
saṁsāriṉo ʻnugṛhṇāti viśvasya jagataḥ patiḥ |

'”.Ṭhe causes (of liberation) are considered to be countless because

they are impelled by (Śiva’s) own will. Sometimes (the Lord graces the
individual soul) by means of the Yoga of devotion, (ritual) action (karman)
or knowledge (vidyā) also, by instructing (in the ways of) righteousness
(dharma) and wisdom (jñāna), or by means of mantras or initiation also. By
these and numerous other ways, the Supreme Lord, the governor (pati) of
all the universe, graces those subject to transmigration.’" (55.57ab)


There (in the Sarvavīratantra it is said):

‘The Supreme Lord is (the universal) cause (of all things) in (this) world

of transmigration without beginning. By His very nature, He is always intent on
gracing living beings.”

could not access. Sanderson has argued that this reference is from the Sarvavīra (see

Tõrzṣõk 1999: intro. p. xli). Moreover, Tórzsók points out that it has close parallels to
the SYM (22/33 and 28/40) (see note to 57cd-58).

'' What happens if there is no teacher? That options were left open for such a

possibility in the early Tantras (and the Brahmayāmala is amongst the earliest) is a clear

indication that even in those times teachers were hard to find. This is not surprising.
These traditions are secret. Out of the public domain, one would not expect teachers to
have had large followings. Moreover, the Tantras themselves were rare. And even if one
managed to get copies, it required then, as now, long hard study and practice to be
qualified to teach them. In short, it appears that right from their incipience, these

traditions were in danger of being lost. Accordingly, provisions for their revival were
made from the start. Moreover, the teachings of the masters encouraged independent

seekers to pursue their quest with confidence. For our modern age, in which these
traditions are being revived, this is a very supportive teaching. While it does not at all
deny the great importance and value of a qualified teacher, it allows for the possibility

that those who have not found one can, nonetheless, make progress by understanding

and applying the teachings for themselves or follow someone who is knowledgeable

enough to guide them.

'“ See above note 4,186.
' See above note 4,186.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

(In this way, the Tantra teaches that) the Supreme Lord bestows grace

by virtue of His own freedom alone. Beginning (with this verse, the passage
goes on) to conclude:

‘Thus Śiva frees the fettered souls by His own (free) willʼ.

This passage declares that although the Lord is free to grace others, the

other instrumental means (to realisation) (nimitta) are (implicitly designated

and) perceived within it. And so ‘His’ʼ, that is, the Supreme Lord’s ‘will alone is
the cause of that.” Although, in accord with such teachings, His own will (alone)
is the (sole) cause (of His) engaging in gracing etc. (souls), it is wonderfully
diverse because there are (many) different kinds of souls who are the object of
(His) grace. Thus it is said that the causes (which serve as means to realisation)
are endless. In reality there is nothing apart from (the Lord’s will) on which
(liberation) depends. This has been said many times before. Thus, because He
possesses, amongst others, (the divine attribute) of protecting (palana) all living
creatures, the Supreme Lord is (called) ‘the governor’ (pati) (of the universe).

He graces the limited perceivers, that is, those subject to transmigration, by
(means of) many kinds of causes (that serve as means to realisation), in accord
with the particular aspirations (of each soul). Sometimes (he graces them by
means) of devotion, sometimes by (means of) Yoga. The meaning is that he
makes (Himself) known as full (and complete) knowledge (of Himself) by

removing the contracted (state of consciousness that binds the soul). “By these
(and numerous other) ways’ includes the practice of austerity and repetition of
Mantras etc. In this way, many means are possible to obtain full (and complete)
knowledge. This is the overall meaning.
Although (the matter) has been explained in this way, in order to
establish that there are endless (numbers of) means (to attaining realisation) and
to gain more (benefit from the scriptures which are) the authority, he quotes the

venerable Brahmayāmala.

TTTGGāTHT] āGHRTTĀ: BI I uy9 1|
AṬTHTRĪTTTGSTITRTĀ-=TTTTT
JTTḤ |
GTS ṭṇGVHTH āIĪ HĪTPBāGTHTGaT I uC I
mātṛmaṇḍalasaṁbodhāt saṁskārāt tapasaḥ priye || 57 ||
dhyānād yogāj japāj jūānān mantrārādhanato vratāt |
saṅṁprāpyaṁ kulasāmānyaṁ jñānaṁ kaulikasiddhidam || 58 II

'“ We observe that the extant early version of the BY does refer to the worship of

Mātṛkās, and even occasionally to the Mātṛmaṇḍala, but references to Kula as a distinct
category rather than a mātrṛkula of Yoginīs and related matters are quite rare. Given the
character of the Tantra, with its Kāpālika rites, which could well accommodate such
references, their scarcity indicates that it belongs to an early period in which Kaulism
had not yet developed to a significant degree. So it may well be that Abhinava is not
quoting here from the BY. Generally, Jayaratha quotes the original source. But he does
not quote the BY here or indeed anywhere in his commentary, indicating that he did not

have access to it.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The knowledge which is the (realization of) universal oneness

within Kula” (the sphere of manifestation) (kulasāmānya) and bestows
(diberation, which is) the Kaula accomplishment (kaulikasiddhi),' can be
attained, Ó Dear One, by awakening the Circle of the Mothers

(mātrṛmaṇḍala), purification, austerity, meditation, yoga, the repetition of
Mantra, knowledge, worship with Mantra (mantrārādhana) and (the
observance of) vows.’ (57cd-58)

The Mothers are the goddesses of the senses of sight and the rest.
(Their) Circle (maṇḍala) is properly (awakened) by ignoring its nature as
(external sensory) activity and understanding it instead to be in the form of
(many) energies, and so (having done that,) awaken it by the agency of the
Circle of Mothers, by means of the process of Pleasing Union etc. (with the

Yoginīs) (priyamelāpa). By endless numbers of means such as these, (one
See below, 29/4.

Kaulikasiddhi, according to Swami Lakshmanjoo, is ‘he complete Cakreśvara state’,

that is, the condition of the Lord of the Wheel of the Energies of the senses and
consciousness.’ In the PTv, it comes about in a flash of realisation, due to an intense
transmission of the power of grace that may also happen in the course of sexual Yoga or
riṭual.
Note the similarity with the ŚSū (2/7), which simply says, ‘the awakening of the

Wheel of the Mothersʼ (mātṛkācakrasaṁbodhaḥ). This practice is a major feature of
the teachings of the Śivasūtra. This passage teaches that this awakening is brought about
by ritual invocation of the Mothers into the maṇḍala. In other words, they are

‘awakened’ by the Mantras used to invoke them. In line with the higher exegeses of the

Kashmiri teachers, Jayaratha is not concerned with ritual, and so focuses on the Wheel

of Mothers as the assembly of the goddesses who are the powers of the senses.
Kṣemarāja in his commentary on this sūtra explains that the awakening of this Wheel is
the process of the conscious assimilation of its energies that seemingly emerge and
become active, one by one, as the Wheel rotates. As these energies are the sources of the
constituents of all the manifest (i.e. immanent) and unmanifest (i.e. transcendent)
reality, this effectively means that when the Wheel is awakened and the yogi is fully

conscious of its potencies and activity as that of absolute consciousness, and hence his
own true nature, he too awakens and reclaims his own inherent power. This is none
other than Mātṛkāśakti, which is the supreme power of Speech as the reflective

awareness (vimarśa) and creative autonomy (svātantrya) of consciousness, and hence
the vital energy of Mantra.

' Mantrārādhana īs mantra recited to worship and propitiate the deity which is that

mantra. So one could also translate the expression as the ‘worship of Mantra’.

One can obtain liberating knowledge through such practices. The intended implicit

sense here, it seems, is that initiation is not essential in order to engage in them.
Jayaratha steers away from this interpretation by glossing ‘purification’ as including

initiation, which he sees as the means by which this takes place. Nonetheless, Abhinava

is arguing the case here that a person can become a teacher independently by himself.
He does refer to initiation as one of many means to realisation in 56-57ab, but this is not
presented as a fundamental prerequisite.

Swami Lakshmanjoo’s explanation of how the Circle of the Mothers is awakened is

very interesting. In accord with Jayaratha, he says that it takes place in two ways. One is

by infusing awareness of God consciousness into the senses, which in this context are
the Mothers. It may also take place spontaneously by vunion with a Yoginī


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


atṭains realization of) ‘universal oneness within Kula’. (Oneness is attained)

within Kula, that is, in accord with the dictum, ‘within Kula, which is the field

of creation . . .” (it is attained) everywhere here within (all that is) of the

nature of subject and object, that arises (continuously) by a process of
(apparent) separation from one’s own (true innate) nature. (Its oneness) is

‘universal’, that is, (it is perpetually) present in association (with all things);
otherwise, (Kula, which is the totality of all things,) would not even manifest.
This is the sense. Thus, (abiding in the state of) being within the Kula, that is,
within the Self, is this accomplishment (siddhi) which it gives. The meaning is
that one certainly attains the knowledge which is the supreme subject shining
radiantly as one’s own nature alone. (This takes place by) ‘purification,’ that is,
by initiation and the like.
Surely (one may ask,) if this is so, then (is not) the main characteristic

of a teacher who is ‘uncreated-cum-created’ that he is immersed (niṣṭha) in the

network of means, namely, contemplation (bhāvanā) and the rest? The author

himself says (the following) in order to remove this doubt.

ḍr% āī āīd g9ad |

q ũā fē īāā ēgST® TRATT I u.8 1I
(yoginīmelāpa). He explains: “When you are absorbed in the awareness of God
consciousness sometimes you practice with no result. You are merging inside, growing

with desire to see Him. Sometimes in an instant your eyes close and you feel yourself

surrounded by divine women and they illuminate you. This is priyamelāpa [Pleasing
Union] (as opposed to haṭhamelāpa [Violent Union]). This occurs just by your
continuous devotion and use of the Mantras given in Chapter Thirty-one [of the
Tantrāloka]. In Union with a Yoginī (yoginīmelāpa) two Mantras are given. One is for
Pleasing Union (priyamelāpa) and one is for Violent Union (haṭhamelāpa). The second

is superior. The latter involves the ‘protection of the cracks (that is, weak spots)

(cidrarākṣaṇa) so that there will be no ‘leakage’ [of God consciousness]. In Violent
Union with the Yoginīs, (the Yoginīs) make you lie down and have sex with you, or

they offer prasāda (sacrificial food) in your mouth that seems obnoxious. As soon as it

is put in your mouth you get elevated, that is mātrmaṇḍalasaṁbodha (the awakening of

the Circle of Mothers), that is the process of violent union with the Yoginī

(haṭhayoginīmelāpakrama). Pleasing Union (priyamelāpa) is inferior; you get sweet

things from the Yoginī. It is not the process of the Awesome Practice by means of the

energy of consciousness (vijñānakalābhīmacaryākrama). The Awesome Practice
(bhīmacaryā) is Violent Union (haṭhamelāpa) which is very effective. The Master will

give one or other Mantra to the disciple and will tell him which way union (nelāpa) will
occur, so that he doesn’t get confused and accepts whatever is given and whatever act is
to be performed. It is internal. He does it in samādhi. These foul substances are given to

him in samādhi. For women beautiful men appear. This is Siddhamelāpa (Union with
Siddhas).”

' This line is also quoted above in TĀv ad 1/1. The reading there is kulam

utpattigocaraḥ, ‘Kula is the field of creation . . ., which is practically the same reading

as we find in the printed edition here, which reads utpattigocaram. However, above MS
Ch, J, Jh, T, and D read kula utpattigocare — ‘within Kula which is the field of creation’.

Jayaratha also reads ‘kule’ within Kula — in his gloss of this statement. Thus, as this
variant is better aligned with what Jayaratha says, both in the first instance as well as
here, it has been accepted.

TANTRĀLOKA

tattvajñānātmakaṁ sādhyaṁ yatra yatraiva dr̥śyate |
sa eva hi gurus tatra hetujālaṁ prakalpyatām |l 59 |I
He alone is the (true) teacher wherever the goal, which is knowledge
of (ultimate) reality, is seen (to be). Apply the network of means there (to
atṭṭain the knowledge the teacher has attained spontaneously).
Wherever one sees (the goal) one desires to attain, namely, one’s own

(true) nature, which is complete realisation (pūrṇaṁ jñānaṁ) and the supreme
reality, one should know that that is the ‘uncreated-cum-created’ (type of)
teacher. He is not stuck (niṣṭha) in just the network of means, namely,

contemplation (bhāvanā) and the rest. In this way, in accord with the dictum

that ‘causes do not necessarily (produce their) effects (immediately and in every
case), sometimes, a certain (teacher) may not attain complete realisation
although he has exerted himself (to practice) in the network of means (to
realisation), such as contemplation and the rest. Thus, in some way (and to some
degree), his status may be that of an ‘uncreated-cum-created’ (teacher, although

he is not yet fully realised). This kind of realisation (jñāna) is occasional (it

does not arise at any fixed time), and so (one should understand that) it will
(arise in the future) due to some cause. Thus it is said that (for such an adept),
‘ṭhe network of means should be applied there (to attain the knowledge the
teacher has attained spontaneously)ʼ. Thus here, (according to us, this
teacher’s) primary characteristic is that he possesses complete knowledge,
which is the fruit (of that practice). This is the overall sense.

And that is not just our own idea. Thus, he corroborates (this teaching)
by paraphrasing (a passage from the Brahmayāmala):
Direct Initiation by the Goddess

tattvajñānādṛte nānyal lakṣaṇaṁ brahmayāmale |
According to the Brahmayāmala, apart from the knowledge of
(ultimate) reality, there is no other distinguishing characteristic (of a true
teacher). (60ab)

“ The same dictum is quoted above in TĀv intro to 1/161 (see 1/161 for Abhinava’s
response), and also TĀv intro to 9/122.
' For this reason, even though the practitioner (sādhaka) may practice meditation, he
does not always realise full knowledge through it. But even so, he may have developed

to a level of an ‘uncreated-cum-created’ teacher, because he has attained that state of
spontaneous realisation through his practice. However, he is not well established within

himself, and so has to resort again to the practice of external means. Even so, he is a
teacher for those who see that knowledge of ultimate reality shining within him,
although he still needs to practice further. It is the teacher’s realisation that makes him a
teacher. If he is still engaged in practice, this is not what characterizes him as a teacher,
but this is not relevant, nor does it detract from his status and authenticity as a teacher.
However, he is not on the same level as a teacher who is spontaneously fully realised.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


In another scripture, it is said that (a teacher should be) ‘well disposed,
in good spirits, and always devoted to the repetition of Mantra and making
offerings to the fire.” Setting aside (this) characteristic (of a teacher), it is said in

the venerable Brahmayāmala that the primary characteristic of a teacher is (his)
knowledge of (ultimate) reality. This is the meaning of (this) statement. It is said
elsewhere, with the same intended (sense): ‘The most excellent teacher is one
who possesses (this) knowledge, even if he is devoid of all (the other)

characteristics (of a good teacher).

Surely (one may ask,) if (the practice) of contemplation and the rest
does not bear any fruit even for one who has made (a great deal of) effort,
would that not contradict (the teaching of) the scripture? Taking up this question
again, (Abhinava) corroborates (his teaching) by paraphrasing (arthadvāreṇa)
(the Brahmayāmala).

āī siṁ aṁaī araīkũd: || k |
amṝhxr ī cafa: fē āī-rat āītēa
TTTHĪATt JTTṢṀHII HIṬHGTRĪTTT I E2 I

a: aī ũ̄azf |

tatraiva coktaṁ sevāyāṁ kṛtāyām avikalpataḥ l| 60 ||

sādhakasya na cet siddhiḥ kiṅṁ kāryam iti codite |

ātmīyam asya saṁjñānakrameṇa svātmadīkṣaṇam || 61 ||

sasphuratvaprasiddhyarthaṁ tataḥ sādhyaṁ prasiddáhyati |
!ṭ is said there itself (where the goddess) asks: “What should be
done if the adept has not achieved success (siddhi) even though he has
served

(his

teacher

with

a

mind)

free

of

thought

(and

doubts)

(avikalpataḥ)?” (To which the Lord replies): “He should initiate himself

through the progressive (development) of insight (saṁjñānakrama) into his

own nature, so that (his Mantras etc.) may acquire the effulgence of

consciousness, by virtue of which he attains the goal.”” (60cd-62ab)

This line is also quoted above ad 1/45. See note there. A variant of this line is found
below as 23/6ab. Abhinava paraphrases it from the Kacabhārgavatantra, which may be
another name for the Bhargaśikhā.

2 Cf. above, note 4,187.
?” While Siddhānta Śaivism (which Sanderson denotes as ‘the right’) considered that
only ritual action can serve as the vehicle of the empowering grace Śiva bestows, that
can vouchsafe the higher state and status of a teacher, the other traditions (which

Sanderson denotes as ‘the left’) did not. As a consequence of their acceptance of
knowledge as the true and sole means to liberation, they maintained that it is possible to
attain the highest states of realization, and hence the status of the most excellent
teachers, without recourse to ritual. However, as Sanderson explains: ‘This [. . .] view
was in flagrant conflict with the central principle of the common core of Śaiva doctrine.

The left, therefore, had to disguise its heresy; and it did so by claiming that such gurus,
far from being uninitiated, have actually received a higher kind of initiation. While the

ordinary candidate must pass through a ritual conducted by a consecrated officiant,
these mystics (jūānī) are empowered directly by Śiva himself [see above TĀv on 1/43],

TANTRĀLOKA

‘There’ in the venerable Brahmayāmala, (this) is said (concerning the

adept who is) ‘free of thought’, in accord with the dictum: ‘one who has doubts

is not successfulʼ; and thought is doubt, which (in this case) is absent because
his own view is sound. Even though (the disciple) ‘has served’ (his teacher and
deity), repeating Mantra hundreds of thousands of times and the rest as taught in
his own ritual procedure (kalpa), (but) due to some inability on (his) teacherʼs
part, (he does not achieve) the success which is its fruit, namely, the

atṭtainment of the object of (his) mind’s desire, then ‘what should he do°?
When the goddess had asked this question, the Lord replied that ‘he should
initiate himself”, that is, reflect (on his own nature) as supreme consciousness,

so that it may serve as a further means to energize the nature of the Mantra, for
example, that he is repeating, so that ‘they may be endowed with the
effulgence of consciousness through the progressive (development) of his
insight (saṁjñānakrama) into his own nature, that is, the correct insight into
his own (nature) which is related to (his true) Self, which, free of the opposition

of doubt, is (of the form) ‘the Self alone is all this’.™ Tts ‘progressive

(development) is the ascent onto the supreme summit (of consciousness), in
accord with the excellence of (his) practice. By virtue (of this practice), the

adept ‘aṭṭainsʼ the reality he wishes to attain. The meaning is that (in this way)

as was believed to happen in the case of the souls awaiting release in the worlds

(bhuvanam) other than ours. As for the ritual consecration (abhiṣeka) in which the
initiate is raised to the office of the officiant (ācāryaḥ) by having water impregnated
with the power of the relevant set of mantras poured over him, this too is accomplished,
we are told, within the mystic himself “by the goddesses [embodied as his own internal
awareness]” [below, 13/142ab]. The goddesses take the place of the young girls
(kumārī) who pour the empowering water on the candidate’s head in the cults of the left.

The action, though attributed to the goddesses, is really Śiva’s — just as the girls are
directed by the officiant — since they are the personification of his powers.”
Cf. above 4/450, with reference to PT 18 and 25abc. There the initiation takes
place directly, through Siva’s grace, by the liberating knowledge that develops thereby

within the aspirant's consciousness. We may add here that we need not understand that
the procedure taught in the BY indicated here was only meant for the exceptional few,

or those who had already attained a higher degree of insight or were capable of it,

although it would seem that Abhinava himself does (see below 13/140-141). The
procedure here, we are told, is meant for any very sincere and devoted disciple who is
being unjustly refused initiation by his teacher. We are told next that he is said to pass

through all the levels of initiation, starting with the basic common one. He is thus

clearly indicating that this procedure can work, and is supported by a range of

scriptures, for anyone who, being such, his own insight is in one stage or another of the
process of its development. Procedures for self-initiation are not common, but they do
exist. An example is the rite of self-initiation into the worship of Vajrabhairava, the
tutelary deity of Tibetan Buddhist Kargyupa. Another is the self-initiation into the
worship of Śiva as Dakṣiṇamūrti, which is well known in South India.

The printed text here clearly says that this inability (vaiguṇya) is that of the adept

(sādhaka), but the remedy clearly implies that that it is the teacher who cannot elevate
his disciple. Otherwise, if the adept could receive the initiation he needs from his
teacher, why should he be advised to initiate himself? Accordingly, the reading
sādhakasya — adept— has been emended to ācāryasya — ‘teacher.

This Upaniṣadic saying is also quoted above ad 1/147-148.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


he may proceed (to progress) up to the (final) complete development of the fruit
(of his practice).
He (now goes on) to explain the overall meaning (of the teaching).

STT TaTāāf̄īī TTTTITTRT I| £3 1
S TGTTITJTĀĪ
TSTĪT T THR |
anena svātmavijñānaṁ sasphuratvaprasādhakam || 62 ||
uktaṁ mukhyatayācāryo bhaved yadi na sasphuraḥ |

It is taught by this (statement) that the (the adept’s) own insight

(svātmavijñāna) (into his own nature) is the cause of the effulgence (of

Mantras etc). (Therefore,) if there is no teacher (available) who is effulgent
(with consciousness to do this for him, he should cultivate this insight) as

the principal (source of their empowerment). (62cd-63ab)

‘The point made here by the venerable Brahmayāmala is that the
adept’s own ‘insight’ serves as the principle means (nimitta) (to the
development) of the effulgence (of the consciousness) of, for example, the
Mantra (he) repeats, if the teacher is not effulgent (with consciousness)

because he is not one with the Supreme Lord. Thus, as on the contrary, (it is the

adept himself who is) a teacher endowed with the effulgence (of consciousness),

he should initiate (himself) into that (Mantra) within himself, by virtue of which
his Mantra may also be effulgent (with consciousness, as he is).

Surely (one may aṣsk,) whether the teacher be effulgent (with
consciousness) or not, what does that have to do with our purpose? (One must
make do with any teacher); without him initiation does not take place by

itself If that were so, it would be contrary to (the teachings of) the scripture.


So is that explanation not wrong? With this doubt in mind, he says:


ā̄-̄ SN TṬ JTHrḡPTTITGĪTI | £3 1

TTṬ TT¥ĪYĀTĀTḤ ṬTH; ḍHAĀT TAT I ē;
tatraiva ca punaḥ śrīmadraktārādhanakarmaṇi l| 63 ||
vidhiṁ proktaṁ sadā kurvan māsenācārya ucyate |
pakṣeṇa sādhako ʻrdhārdhāt putrakaḥ samayṝ tathā || 64 |

One could also translate svātmavij-nānam as ‘insight into his own nature’, but 1

choose to follow Jayaratha. Both meanings are correct and make good sense. Mantras
gain power by the adept’s power of awareness. They do so also by the insight he has

into his true nature as universal,

ultimately, omnipotent consciousness. Cf.

Spandakārikā verse 26, quoted above in note 4,148.

Read sasphuratve mukhyatvena nimittam uktaṁ yadi nāma ācāryaḥ for sasphuratve
nimittam uktaṁ yadi nāma mukhyatvenācāryaḥ.

One could also translate ‘there is no initiation of oneself.’

TANTRĀLOKA

Again, it is said there itself (in the Brahmayāmala) that he who
applies the aforementioned procedure (vidhi) regularly (without a break) to

the worship of the venerable (goddess) Raktā is said to be a regular Śaiva
initiate (samayin) within three and a half days, an apprentice (destined to
become a teacher) (putraka) in a week, an adept (sādhaka) in fifteen days,
and a teacher (ācārya) in a month. (63cd-64)
(It is said) ‘there’, in the venerable Brahmayāmala after the question

and answer that have (just) been mentioned (occur), (in the section) dealing with
the procedure concerning the venerable (goddess) Raktā, that is, the venerable
Caṇḍikā. The ʻaforementioned procedure’, which by its excellence, that is,

This formulation is typical of the way the scriptures express themselves. Moreover,
this a statement of a ‘fact’, which Abhinava on his own initiative would never make.

Accordingly, we can safely assume that he is quoting here. On the other hand, the verse
that follows, like the one that precedes, are more of the nature of an explanation.
Abhinava is telling us the reason why the scripture is true, and how it is possible for that
be so on the basis of fundamental metaphysical principles.

Jayaratha did not have access to the Brahmayāmala, so it is not impossible here that

he is mistaken. Caṇḍikā does appear in the pantheon of the BY that has been recovered,
but either as the Yoginī Caṇḍākṣī (see further ahead) or as one the eight Matṛkās. It is
not likeḷy that the goddess Raktā is Caṇḍīkā, that is, the goddess Durgā. We have
already observed that the reference here cannot be traced in the extant BY. Indeed, very

few of the references Abhinava makes can be traced in the BY that has been recovered

in Nepal in an 11 century manuscript and its Nepalese descendants. But while it
appears that the Nepalese recension differs from the Kashmiri one, it does contain

numerous procedures for the worship of the goddess Raktā. Visualized as sitting on the

left of Bhairava, Raktā is his consort in the BY. But although she is one of the principal
deities of the BY, she is not a major deity in other Tantric systems.

Raktā repeatedly appears in the BY as the first member of a group of eight

yoginīs, who are ‘the horde of the Mantra (goddess) Raktā’ (raktāmantragaṇa), headed

by her (raktādi). They embody eight of the syllables of the mantra of the main male
deity of the BY, namely, Kāpālīśa Bhairava. The Mantra is (OṀ or) HŪM CAṆḌE

KĀPĀLINI SVĀHĀ. Ṭhe nine syllables are presided over by the nine deities, who are

the main object of daily worship. These are Kapālīśa Bhairava ((OṀ or)
HŪṀ), his four
goddesses, Raktā (CAṀ), Karālā (ḌE), Caṇḍākṣī (also called Caṇḍikā) (KĀ) and
Mahocchuṣmā (PĀ), and their four attendant companions (ḍūtī) — Karālī (LI), Danturā
(NĪ), Bhīmavaktrā (SVĀ) and Mahābalā (HĀ). Theṣe last four are hardly more than
embodiments of epithets that describe the four main goddesses. The goddesses, also
called Yoginīs, are set in the eight directions around Kāpālīśa Bhairava, as follows:
1) East: Raktā; 2) South: Karālinī; 3) West: Caṇḍākṣī; 4) North: Mahocchuṣmā; 5)
South-east: Karālyā; 6) South-west: Danturā; 7) North-west: Bhīmavaktrā; 8) North-

east: Mahābalā.

pūrvapatre [k: sūrva-] nyased raktāṁ praṇavāsanapūrvakām [. . .]
[k: -de karālini] |
anenaiva vibhāgena dakṣiṇāre karālinī
paścime [k: -maṁ] caiva caṇḍākṣī mahocchuṣmā [kh: -chuṣmā; k: -chuṣmāṁ] tathottare |
āgneye tu karāḷyākhyā [k: -lākhyā] nairṛte [k, kh: nairite] danturā [k: dantunāṁ] tathā |

vāyavye [k: -vya] bhīmavaktrā [k, kh:

-vaktrān] tu īśāne [k: i-] tu mahābalā |I

pūrvakrameṇa vai devi yoginyo [k: -nyā] vinyased budhaḥ | BY 30/21ab, 23-25ab


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


independence from a teacher etc., consists of taking up (the practice of) that
Mantra, (its) repetition, the visualization (of the deity) etc. The adept who
applies it ‘regularly, that is, every day, is said to be ‘a teacher in a month’,
without (receiving any) consecration or the like. The meaning is that once he

has commenced (to exercise) the authority consonant with that, he does not

return (pratyavaiti) (to his prior uninitiated state). In the same way, (he
becomes) ‘an adept in fifteen days’, and in half the time, that is, in seven days,
‘a spiritual son’, and ‘within three and a half days, an initiated Śaivite

(samayin).
Surely (one may ask,) how could (one possess) the state of an initiated

Śaivite and the rest without initiation? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TRōīīī īrṁza fafē#ra gaNq 1 ē.,
dīkṣayej japayogena raktā devī kramād yataḥ |
guror alābhe proktasya vidhim etaṁ samācaret || 65 |I

This is so because the goddess Raktā (herself) initiates him
progressively by means of (his) repeated recitation of (Her) Mantra. If (the

aspirant) cannot find a teacher such as has been described, he should

observe this procedure (vidhi) (and take the Mantra himself directly).

AIIl the (ritual and other) ritual action the teacher performs is indicated

(by saying that the goddess) ‘initiates’ (the aspirant directly). As is said:

‘It is Caṇḍikā (Herself) who offers oblation and repeats Mantra

everywhere here to elevate" (Her devotee).’

(She does this) ‘progressively° through (all the levels of initiation),
beginning with (that of the first common) Śaiva initiation of the Rule (samaya).
Sureḷy (one may ask,) if this is the case, would not all the scriptures, which
(invariably) praise the teacher, become meaningless? With this doubt in mind,

he says: ‘if (the aspirant) cannot find a teacher’ and so on ‘such as has been

describedʼ, that is,

‘uncreated-cum-created’ etc., who is effulgent (with

consciousness), ‘he should observe this procedure’; that is, he should practice
the procedure previously described, of taking the mantra and the rest by himself.
Otherwise, (if he does find a qualified teacher), he should, on the contrary, get

the teacher to do everything (for him). This is the sense (of this verse).

These Yoginīs appear throughout the BY, but especially in chapters 29 and 30,
where their maṇḍala is described (cf. Sanderson 1988: 672). Sanderson (2007: 237 n
23) has located the inclusion of Caṇḍā Kāpalinī and her retinue along with her nine-

syllable Mantra, the root-Mantra of the Brahmayāmala, in two ritual manuals of

Kashmir. These are the Agnikāryapaddhati and Śivarātri-pāūjāpadádhati. He also notes
variants and derivatives of this Mantra (ibid.).

Read with MS Jh proddhe for preddhe.

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask,) if this is so, according to the (scriptures which

say that) ‘those foolish people who have taken mantras by themselves (without
initiation) suffer (countless) afflictions,’' mantras learnt from books have the

defect of (causing such) afflictions and more. So how is it that that is said

elsewhere? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Learning Mantras from Books

d ṬTITRTTTAT
āT ṜH: |

mate ca puṣṭakād vidyādhyayane doṣa īdrśaḥ |

ukto yas tena taddoṣābhāve ‘sau na niṣiddhatā || 66 ||

(The Lord) has said in the (Siddhayogeśvarī) Mata that the study of

Mantras from a book is (generally) attended by the same defect (that is,

they lack the effulgence of consciousness). Thus, in the absence of this

defect, it is not prohibited.

(It is said) ‘in the Mata’, that is, in the venerable Siddhāmata. As he
will say: ‘thus, this is said in the Siddhāmata also with regards to Vidyās learnt

from books.’" “He’, the Lord, has said that (study of Mantras from books) ‘is
attended by the same’ (defect) mentioned previously, that is, they lack the
effulgence (of consciousness). Mantras in books have no vitality (vīrya).

Thus, those that have been taken (from books) do not shine with their own

radiant energy (1ejas) in such a way that (they may serve as a means to) achieve
their own (particular) accomplishments. Thus, because Mantras learnt from
books are devoid of accomplishment (siddhi), they are said to be only (sources
of) affliction. As he will say:

" This is a citation from the SYM. See Tōrzsóōk 1999: 219. The question naturally

arises that if a person has not taken initiation, and hence not been taught the Mantras he

requires by a teacher, he must necessarily have to take them from books. But Jayaratha
quotes the SYM here, that warns against doing that. In the following verse, referring to
the SYM with this line in mind, Abhinava voices his response to this objection,

blending it in with the citation in such a way that it appears to be the view of the SYM
itself.

See below, 26/21-24ab. If the learning of mantras is without fault, then it is allowed

to learn them from books. Jayaratha adds that in spite of the generally held view that
one should not learn mantras from books because they lack vitality (vīrya), there are

some individuals to whom this vitality manifests.

Below, 26/23ab. See a little further ahead in the commentary, where the verse that
follows is quoted.
Read sasphuratvābhāvalakṣaṇaḥ for sasphuratvābhāvalaśaṇaḥ.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

‘A written Mantra is devoid of vitality. It is (something that has been)

conceived (kalpita) here. Due to the strength of the (linguistic) convention (that

obscures it), its (innate) glory (mahaḥ) is not perceived from a book.’

In the absence of that defect (for the use of such Mantras), there is not

such prohibition, (as is commonly the case when we are told that) ‘Mantras
should not be learnt from booksʼ. Thus, for the aforestated reason, some
Mantras learnt from books do shine with their own (innate) radiant energy. As
he will say:
‘Those who know the vitality present in a Mantra, even if it has been

obtained from a book, are said to be have been purified by Bhairava (Himself),

and are spontaneously realised (sāṁsiddhika).”

He (now) quotes that same book (that is, the Śiddhayogeśvarīmata),

which declares that (same) intended (teaching).

ṝa-zīcīa-i ṁa fhsṁīā īfzd 1

1]

mantradravyādiguptatve phalaṁ kim iti codite |

Whether Mantras have literal meanings or not, the power of a Mantra lies in the

power of awareness. Awareness is a direct apprehension unmediated by thoughts and
notions. These are clothed in language made of words that convey the meanings that

convention assigns to them. A Mantra is ‘meaningful’ only in the sense that it heightens

and deepens awareness of the Deity which is its object, and of which the Mantra is the
sonic body.

Below, 26/22. t is worth quoting the preceding verse to complete the sense: ‘Mantras

are made of phonemes, and these are (forms of) reflective awareness. Thus, this can
(only) be transmitted to the disciple if it is not separate from the consciousness of the
teacher.”

' Below, 26/23cd-24ab. Mantras that are vital and functional are said to bestow
particular accomplishments (siddhi). Some Mantras are for very specific purposes,
others have a more general application. But whatever they be, it is essential that Mantras

possess what is termed ‘vitality (vīrya) or ‘radiant energy’ (tejas). The Tantras supply

ritual procedures to infuse this energy into them, and appropriate initiatory rites to
purify the practitioner to empower him or her to use them. Thus, Mantras learnt from

books that have not been purified and vitalized in this way are generally powerless. The

effort one may put into repeating them is just useless affliction. But there are exceptions
to this general rule. Abhinava affirms, as do the scriptures, that there are Mantras that

possess an intrinsic power of their own. It is however necessary to know that by means
of the very insight which is the reflective awareness (vimarśa) Kashmiri masters teach is

that vitality. By reciting Mantras of this sort, such as the one taught in the
Brahmayāmala, with sound insight into their nature, and making use of them correctly,
the Deity itself purifies them directly.

Abhinava now responds to the question, that if it is legitimate to draw Mantras

directly from books, then why are they kept secret?

TANTRĀLOKA

pustakādhītavidyā ye dīkṣāsamayavarjitāḥ || 67 ||

tāmasāḥ parahiṁsādi vaśyādi ca caranty alam |

na ca tattvaṁ vidus tena doṣabhāja iti sphuṭam || 68 II

If one were to ask what is the benefit of keeping, for example, the

Mantras and the sacrificial substances secret, (we reply that) those who
have learnt Mantras from books (but) have not been initiated, do not
observe the prescribed code of conduct (samaya), and under the sway of the
darkness (tāmasa) (of ignorance), are violent towards others and practice
(magical rites) to control (them) and the like, and do not know the true

nature (tattva) (of these Mantras), they thus clearly possess (many)
defects. (67-68)


Indeed, (it is said) here (in the Siddhayogīśvarīmata):


“(I have) explained (this) and hidden it from them. Therefore, it should
not be written in a book. It should be obtained from the teacher’s mouth, and in

no other way at any time.

Again:


‘a wise man should always (take care) with effort to protect (his)

Having heard many times such things the Lord has said, the goddess
asked: ʻwhat is the purpose of (keeping them) secret’? by not writing Mantras
and the like in books etc.? The Lord replied, with regards to the writing of
The immediate sense of na ca tattvaṁ viduḥ īs, ‘moreover, they do not know the

nature of reality°. Jayaratha’s explanation of the word tattva as the nature of Mantra

makes sense. In line with that reasoning is his attribution of the defects mentioned here
to the Mantras, rather than the practitioners. However, it would be quite in accord with

Abhinava’s general exegetical approach, which repeatedly stresses the primacy of
knowledge, that the implicit intended sense here is that Mantras only function if there is
such knowledge (i.e. insight into one's own Śiva nature), and that moreover, it is only
the Mantras that are in consonance with it that are effective means on the path to
liberation. Otherwise, not only are the Mantras defective, those who practice them are
subject to those defects. Thus, it appears that Jayaratha’s explanation is not correct. See
the following note.

" Cf. SYM 28/44cd. Tôṛzsōk (1999: 220): “In fact, it may be that another passage of
the SYM (1/7-14) which tells us that Devī asks Bhairava why he has made the mantras
ineffective, to which Bhairava replies that people practiced them without observing the

appropriate rules. Abhinavagupta’s paraphrase changes the focus of the passage. For
while the SYM emphasizes the importance of the guru and his possession by

Rudraśakti, which renders the mantras powerful, Abhinavagupta’s version stresses the
role of knowledge, which is more important than having a guru. Moreover, his version
seems to condemn practitioners of black magic, while nothing of the sort is said or

implied in the SYM; on the contrary, the problem in the SYM is that the mantras are not
capable of performing such acts.”

" This line is also drawn from the SYM, but cannot be traced in the available short
recension.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Mantras in books and the like, that: ‘Mantras learnt from a book (are not
effective) etc. Some ‘have not been initiated and do not observe the
prescribed code of conduct (samaya)ī and so, ‘under the sway of the

darkness (tāmasa) of the two kinds of ignorance, spiritual and intellectual, are
in a state which is devoid of (liberating) knowledge. Thus, having studied those
(Mantras from books and made use of them, they) ‘are violent towards others

and the likeʼ and that (higher purpose of Mantra) is not accomplished, as
they do not know the true nature of Mantras etc., because the teacher’s oral
(instruction) (gurumukha) is missing. Thus, ‘clearly’, these (Mantras) possess

such defects as casting down to hell (those who recite them). This is because

(these) Mantras are devoid of vitality, as they have been learnt from books, and
so, applied to this and that (magical rite) to control others etc., they are not
successful. Thus, (for all these reasons, those who practice these Mantras) are

themselves lax in (practicing the teaching of the) scripture, and so they also
cause others to be disrespectful (of them). Thus, (by practicing in this way, all)
they may gain (is just) a cause (nimitta) to abandon the (correct) procedure
(prescribed by) the scriptures (śāstraprakriyā).
He now explains the two parts here (in the first of these two verses),
because they (do not seem to) be consistent.

JGTHT |
pūrvaṁ padayugaṁ vãācyam anyonyaṁ hetuhetumat |
The first two parts (of the above verse) are in a mutual relationship

of cause and effect. (69ab)

The first two parts (of the above verse) are in a mutual (relationship of

cause and effect), that is, because (such people) learnt the Mantras (they know)

from books, therefore they have not been initiated, and (conversely), because

they have not been initiated, therefore they have learnt the Mantras (they know
only) from books.

Now that he has described the ‘uncreated-cum-created’ (type of teacher)
in this way, he begins to describe the ‘created’ one also.
The Created-cum-uncreated (kalpitākalpita) Teacher

zṇxg vīāi fṝṁ tī araṁraitxrz ē< u

āĨINq |
yas tu śāstraṁ vinā naiti śuddhavidyākhyasaṁvidam || 69 ||
guroḥ sa śāstram anvicchus tad uktaṁ kramam ācaret |

He who does not attain the (state of) consciousness called Pure

Knowledge without the scriptures should seek the scriptures of a teacher
2 Read parahiṁsādi for parahiṁsādyartha.
See above, 4/67cd.

TANTRĀLOKA

(who knows them well), and practice the procedure (krama) they
prescribe. (69cd-70ab)

Again, one who, on the contrary, ‘does not attain the (state of)

consciousnessʼ, which is sound discriminative reasoning (sattarka) ‘called
Pure Knowledge’, without reflecting on the (meaning of the) scripture, that is,
one for whom sound discriminative reasoning does not arise by itself
(spontaneously), wishing to seek a scripture with the desire to hear it etc.

directly from any teacher who is (of any type) ‘uncreated’ and the rest, should
‘practice the procedure (krama), that is, ‘having done this, one should do
that’, taught by the scripture he has learnt by developed interaction (with it)
(vṛádhavyavahāra) in such a way that, by worshipping his teacher, Pure
Knowledge may arise.

He says that:

The Created (kalpita) Teacher

3 āīTqdTṬPTRIS ĪTFRT: II ṣ0 |

TTtakīrārīd
vraṁ arcaiī ā̃:

āhftūdr: 1 .5g 1

EEEÚEEVIIEIĒFṭECACTĀĪ

yena kenāpy upāyena guruṃ ārādhya bhaktitaḥ || 70 ||
taddīkṣākramayogena śāstrārthaṁ vetty asau tataḥ |
abhiṣekaṁ samāsādya yo bhavet sa tu kalpitaḥ || 71 ||
sann apy aśeṣapāśaughavinivartanakovidaḥ |
He who has worshipped (his) teacher with devotion by any

(befitting) means, knows the purport of the scriptures through the series of
initiations (dīkṣākrama) (the teacher gives him). Then, once he has
The term ‘krama’ in this context is the ritual and Yogic procedure taught in a

particular system. The term is used, by extension, to denote the system itself,

particularly a Kaula one. So, for example, Abhinavagupta is teaching the ‘krama’ of the
Anuttara Trika in his Tantrāloka. See above, 1/14.

Notice that Abhinava says that it is possible to make progress without referring to
scriptures or the writings of teachers, like Abhinava, that are derived from their
teachings. But this is not so for everybody. Indeed, most people need some such

support. But Abhinava does not recommend that they study the scriptures by

themselves; rather they should go to a qualified teacher who knows them to learn what

is taught in them. Again, it is possible that a teacher is fully realised, and so he himself
needs no such support to guide his disciples. But even so, he may have to refer to the

scriptures if his disciples are not sufficiently developed to attain realisation without
them.

The series of initiations a teacher imparts to his disciple, if he receives all of them,

begins with the basic initiation into the Rule (samayadīkṣā). By this initiation he
becomes an ordinary Āgamic Śaivite. The teacher may then initiate him again, if thatis
appropriate, in two alternative ways. Oneis by initiating him into the status of an adept


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


obtained consecration (abhiṣeka), he becomes a ‘created’ (kalpita) teacher.
However, even though he is such (and not one who is spontaneously
enlightened), he is (equally) skilled in stemming the torrent (of his
disciplesʼ) fetters. (70cd-72ab)
Here indeed, the first thing to do is to worship the teacher according to
the procedure (krama) taught in the scriptures (in such places as) ‘once he has
worshipped (the teacher), and because he has satisfied, he obtains from him

Śaiva initiation. . . .’ There is no other means, and so one should exert

(oneself) intensely to be accepted by him. Nor is he the sole (teacher),

because those who are worthy of worship are many. Some are worshipped by
the desire to listen (on the part of the disciple), some by money, some by the
offering of knowledge in return. As is said in general, (one should worship the

teacher) ‘by any (befitting) means’, that is, one should do whatever needs to be

done for his worship to be successful. This is the (overall) sense. Again, what
should be done is not like something that should be done one has seen. Thus he
says that (he should be worshipped) ‘with devotion’. (Then,) because he has
been worshipped (and has been satisfied thereby), a relationship (is established
with the teacher) by means of the sequence of initiations (he imparts) in such a
way that (the disciple) may succeed in understanding the scriptures. Otherwise,
he is not fit even to just hear them, (and so) what possibility can there be (for
him) to understand them? This is the (overall) sense. As is said:

‘one should not recite Śiva’s scriptareʼ in front of those who have not

been initiated.”

And after that:


‘consecration (as a teacher) is prescribed here for one who has fully
understood the scripture, and not otherwise.
In accord with this view, ‘(once he has obtained) consecration’

properly, with full knowledge etc. from that same teacher, he has been rendered
fit in every circumstance to grace others etc. Again, although he has been
produced by another teacher and (so) is a ‘created’ (teacher), he is ‘(equally)

skilled in stemming the torrent (of his disciples’) fetters” without residue

(niḥsaṁskāra). This is the meaning. It is implied by (saying) that although he is
(sādhaka). As an adept he is engaged primarily in the repetition of Mantra and other
related practices to attain the accomplishments (siddhi) he seeks. Again, the teacher may

initiate him into the status of a spiritual son (putraka), thereby making him his
apprentice, and then as such, finally consecrate him as a teacher (ācārya). Obviously, a
spontaneously enlightened teacher does not need to be put through this or any other
series of initiations.

MV 1/45ab.

Ṛead ity atitarām for ititarām.

Instead of chivasaṁhitām — Śiva’s scriptur’ MSs Kh, Ch, ṄÑ, and T: read
chāstrapaddhatim — ‘the liturgy of a scripture’, as is the reading of this line quoted

below in TĀv ad 19/36.

TANTRĀLOKA

a ʻcreated’ (teacher), (ultimately) from the point of view of the fruit, there is no

difference at all (between him) and an ‘uncreated’ one. May the Supreme Lord
Himself, having assumed the form of the teacher, remove all the fetters (of his
disciples). That is said (in the following verse):

‘As the Great Lord has directly assumed the body of a man out of

compassion, in the form of a teacher he elevates (His) creatures who are

immersed (in the ocean of transmigration).”

The point here is that, in actual fact, there is no (ultimately significant)
distinction between a ‘created’ and ‘uncreated’ (teacher). In this way, even
some ‘uncreated’ (teacher) may also be ‘created’, because (he practices)
contemplation (bhāvanā) etc. in order to complete his insight (jñāna) into his
own nature (ṣvātmajñāna), and so is said to be ‘uncreated-cum-created’. In the
same way, one who is ‘created’ may in some cases, independently of a teacher,
understand the scripture by the power of his own intuitive insight (pratibhā),
and so may (also) be ‘uncreated’. Thus, in order to define the ‘created-cumuncreated’ (type of) teacher, he says:
The Created-cum-uncreated (kalpitākalpita) Teacher

JṬ gTTATI] GĪÑTTĪTRrBTHTTTĪ I 92 1

TFTTk Jīqār fcũaītcaī
fe : 1

yo yathākramayogena kasmiṁścic chāstravastuni || 72 |
ākasmikaṁ vrajed bodhaṁ kalpitākalpito hi saḥ |
(The teacher) who attains spontaneous (ākasmika) awakened

consciousness (bodha)™ of any matter taught in the scriptures (by

practicing) in conformity with (the reality and) procedure (they teach)

(yathākramayogena) is one who is ‘created-cum-uncreated. (72cd-73ab)

Any c‘created’ teacher ‘who attains spontaneous awakened
consciousnessʼ independently of a teacher etc. ‘of any matter taught in the
scripturesʼ, which is transcendental (lokottara) and concerns the ultimately real
object of knowledge, ‘(by practicing) in conformity with (the reality and)

procedure (they teach)ʼ, that is, in accord with reality, is (also) ‘uncreated’,

because, although he is ‘created’, he has activated (his) awakened consciousness
(bodha) by himself.

Surely (one may ask,) if a ‘created’ teacher is in some aspect
‘uncreated’ to this extent, then what (of that)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Ṛead magnān proddharati prajān for magnāḥ proddharati prajāḥ.

Ṣee above, 4/45cd-47ab.
This translation follows Jayaratha’s explanation. One could also translate ‘in

association with the proper course (of development).


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


The Uncreated (akalpita) Teacher

T; ā JSSH: TIa: | .93 1

3-t : JfhTTTTTTTĀaTI
ā., |

tasya yo ʻkalpito bhāgaḥ sa tu śreṣṭhatamaḥ smṛtaḥ || 73 |
utkarṣaḥ śuddhavidyāṁśatāratamyakṛto yataḥ |
(Of these two), his ‘uncreated’ aspect is considered to be the best (of
all). This is so because the excellence (utkarṣa) (of his realisation) is
determined by the progressive heightening of the (‘uncreated’) aspect,

which is Pure Knowledge. (73cd-74ab)

(The ‘uncreated’ aspect is considered to be) the best (of all), because

‘the excellence (utkarṣa) (of his realisation) is determined by the
progressive heightening of Pure Knowledge’. The gradation of Pure
Knowledge is the reason for (the different kinds of teachers), beginning with the
‘uncreated’ (kind). This is the point.

Surely (one may ask,) it was said previously that there is no difference

between a ‘created’ and an ‘uncreated’ (teacher) with respect to the fruit (of

following one or the other). So why is the ‘uncreated’ one with respect to the
‘created’ (considered to be) the best? With this doubt in mind, he says:

3qa]] īsāTTRTqITRBaTĀHTTTI ṜI: I 9% |
Taiī āīfā’rTTGṬGTGTTTTSTTAT:|

f 3 qvi—heafṣāga

yathā bhede ‘nādisiddhāc chivān muktaśivā hyadhaḥ || 74 ||
tathā sāṁsiddhikajñānād āhṛtajñānino ‘dhamāḥ |
tatsaṁniáhau nādhikāras teṣāṁ muktaśivātmavat |I| 75 ||
kiṁ tu tūṣṇīṁsthitir yad vā kṛtyaṁ tadanuvartanam |
Just as according to the dualist (Śaivite schools) (the fettered souls

who achieve liberation at some point (ādisiddha) and are as they say)
‘liberated Śivas’ (muktaśiva) are inferior to (Śiva Himself) Who is such

originally (anādisiddha), in the same way, (teachers) who have attained
See below, 13/138-139.

Read bhede’ nādisiddhāc-

for bhedenādisiddhāc-. Dualist Śaivasiddhānta teaches

that although there are an infinite number of individual souls, and that they are distinct

from Śiva, they are essentially pure consciousness, as is Śiva Himself. Thus, they are all

Śivas, albeit bound ones (baddáhaśiva). Freed from the obscuring coverings of the

impurity (mala) that separates them from Śiva, they are liberated. They are then called

‘lierated Śivas’ (muktaśiva). In that state they are identical with Śiva. The only

difference is that Śiva has never been bound, that is, His liberated, accomplished state

TANTRĀḶLOKA

knowledge (in the manner just described) are inferior to (the teacher) who
aṭṭains this knowledge spontaneously. In (the latter’s) presence, (the

former) have no authority, just as the ‘liberated Śiva’ souls (have none in
Śiva’s presence). They keep quiet, or if they are to do anything, they behave

according to his example. (74cd-76ab)


It is said according to the dualist Śaiva view (bhedeśvaravāda) that:


‘here (in this teaching) the supreme (state)is equality with Śiva (śivasamatā),
and so liberation (according to this view)is considered to be a state of equality

with Śiva, because (in the liberated state) there is no difference amongst the
iēence and
individual souls with regards to the manifestation of (their) omu
omnipotence etc. However, even so, there is a difference between (Siva) and the

liberated souls in that He ‘is such originallyʼ, whereas their omniscience etc. is

accrued (and adventitious) (upādhika). Thus, just as the attributes of
omniscience and the rest of ‘liberated Śivas’ are not different (from those of

Śiva), even so they are less (than Him), in the same way, the ‘created’ etc.
(kinds of teachers are not essentially different) from the ‘uncreated’ teacher (but
even so are less than him). His knowledge is not accrued (from someone else),

because it operates by itself (spontaneously), whereas the (knowledge other

kinds of teachers possess) is accrued from someone else. Thus, just as liberated

Śivas in Supreme Śiva’s presence have no authority to govern (the process) of

creation (and destruction) etc., in just the same way, the ‘created’ and other

kinds (of teacher have no authority to impart) initiation etc. in the presence of a
Spontaneously Enlightened (teacher). Thus it is rightly said that the most
excellent (teacher) is the ‘uncreated’ one. Surely (then), (one may ask,) if that is
the case, then, like the liberated Śivas (in Supreme Śiva’s presence), do the

created and other (kinds of teacher) do anything in the presence (of a

Spontaneously Enlightened teacher,) or not? With this doubt in mind, he says:


‘they keep quiet, (or if they are to do anything, they behave according to his

example)ʼ.

Surely (one may ask,) although the ‘uncreated’ (teacher is already
spontaneously) engaged by himself in (the insight of sound discriminative)

has no beginning (anādisiddha), whereas the accomplishment of the liberated condition

of these souls, although unending (ananta), has a beginning (ādisiddha), andis attained
by Śiva’s grace. They possess all of the powers and attributes of Śiva Himself, but are
never in conflict with His will, and so do not interfere in the process of creation etc.,

which only Śiva is authorized to govern. See MrT Vidyāpāda, p. 49.

Cf. above 4/43cd-44ab.

Ṣee above, note ad 4/29-30.

The view expressed here is that individual liberated souls are pure, like transparent
crystals. Just as a red coloured flower appears to colour the crystal because of its
presence, that is, adventitiously, similarly, Siva’s presence imparts His divine attributes
of omniscience, omnipotence and the rest to the individual soul adventitiously.

Although Jayaratha implicitly attributes this view to dualist Śaivites, it is not really the
view of the majority of Siddhāntins. Although they are (to varying degrees) dualists,

they maintain that the essential nature of individual souls is inherently the same as that

of Siva Himself. See previous note.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


reasoning, is his need for the scripture etc. mentioned previously, a defect or a
positive quality? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TṬTTTĪFTTRTTSTT āTTRṬGHTĒ I '9¥, I

TaITI GaATTTR.
J TIJTGTĪ T: |

yastv akalpitarūpo ‘pi saṁvādadṛḍhatākṛte || 76 ||
anyato labdhasaṁskāraḥ sa sākṣād bhairavo guruḥ |

That teacher who, even though uncreated (akalpita), has by the

confirmation (obtained) from other (teachers or scriptures) strengthened
(his conviction of the genuineness of his enlightenment) and is thus further

purified, is Bhairava in person (sākṣāt). (J6cd-77ab)
That teacher who,

although

‘uncreated’,

in

order to make

(his

conviction) firm” that ‘this is so, not otherwise’ with regards to his insight

(jñāna) that has arisen spontaneously, (but) which is in the field of his own
experience alone, ‘by the confirmation’ that (reality is) also perceived to be

such ‘from other’ (sources) elsewhere (apart from himself), such as teachers

and scripture etc., collectively or individually from a (particular) teacher or
scripture, and has obtained thereby (the highest state of) excellence, is

‘Bhairava in person’, because he is free within himself of (any further) need
(of confirmation). The meaning is that he is penetrated by full, (complete) and

supreme consciousness.

Surely (one may ask,) how can that be possible by just (a simple)
confirmation? With this doubt in mind, he says:

aqId; ŪJTTRTPTTTṬPGTṬYĪGTT
I SS (

yataḥ śāstrakramāt tajjñaguruprajñānuśīlanāt || 77 ||
ātmapratyayitaṁ jñānaṁ pūrṇatvād bhairavāyate |

This is so because the knowledge proved trustworthy by oneself,
(attained) by putting into practice the procedures laid down in the

scriptures (śāstrakrama) and attending to the wisdom (prajñā) of a teacher
who knows them, is full (and perfect) (pūrṇa), and so leads to the

realisation of one’s authentic identity as Bhairava (bhairavāyate). (77cd78ab)

‘This is so because the knowledge’, which is the source of conviction
(pratyaya) that has arisen within oneself, possessing the confirmation that

This is Abhinavagupta’s case. This verse is quoted below in TĀy ad 13/251-253ab.
Read dārḍhyaṁ for dārḍhya.

See below, 13/158 and 247cd-253ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

comes from the discernment (paryālocana) that ‘this is so and not otherwise’,
by progressively coming to understand (and putting into practice) the scriptures
and ‘attending to the wisdom of a teacher’ who knows the scriptures, has
become firm" by the arising of the certainty that ‘this is so and not otherwise’.

Thus, because (he is) free of (any further) need, (his knowledge,) full (and
complete,) ‘leads to the realisation of one’s authentic identity as Bhairava’.

The meaning is that it shines radiantly as the supreme knowledge of the
Absolute (anuttaraparajñāna), free of (all) doubts.

Thus, the scripture is also such. So he says:


The Sources and Means of Knowledge

frrṝcaaṝḷ āaṝ ar- frtṁa 1

. 19 1

tena śrīkiraṇoktaṁ yad gurutaḥ śāstrataḥ svataḥ || 78 |I

tripratyayam idaṁ jñānam iti yac ca niśāṭane |

tatsaṅghātaviparyāsavigrahair bhāsate tathā | 79 |
This is the reason why it is said in the venerable Kiraṇa that ‘(Śiva
should be known) from the teacher, the scripture and oneself’and (also)
in the Niśātana, (where it says) that ‘this knowledge has three sources of
conviction (pratyaya).’ Again, (this knowledge) shines (variously,)
according to whether (these three operate) in unison, in the reverse

order, or individually. (78cd-79)

" Read dārḍhyaṁ prāptam for dārḍhya prāptam.

for pūrṇa.

One could also translate anuttaraparajñāna as ‘most excellent supreme knowledge’ʼ,

ie. of which there is nothing higher. “Supreme knowledge’ of reality is attained in the

sphere of the Sāmbhava Means, but it is transitory. The ‘most excellent’ knowledge, of
which there is nothing higher, is that of No Means — Anupāya, in which Anuttara is
realised once and for all. This is the knowledge that comes from Anuttara, of Anuttara,
and abides there forever. This is Parabhairava.

KĪṬ 1/9/14b; also quoted above as TĀ 4/414.
See below, 13/197-198, and the commentary there, where the passage from the

Niśātanatantra is quoted in full, of which Jayaratha supplies just the first line here. This
quarter verse is cited ad 26/5-6.

As in the previous case, in which one who, even though he has the knowledge that

develops from himself, needs to confirm it by consulting teachers and the scriptures.
Ultimately, however, Abhinava supports, as one would expect, the view that personal

insight is the best and is, indeed, the basis of all understanding. Thus he already wrote in

the Mālinīvijayavārtika:
prādhānyaṁ prakaṭaṁ
gurutaḥ kila śāstrataḥ

svasaṁvidaḥ |
svataḥ

tad ayaṁ mukhyatayā kr̥taḥ śramaḥ l| 267 ||
śāstravṛttiparatantrito guruḥ


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


(This knowledge) ‘has three sources of conviction’. As is said there

(in the Niśāṭanatantra):

“This knowledge has three sources of conviction, oneself, the scripture
and the teacher’s mouth.”

svātmasaṁvidi ca tat pratiṣṭhitam |
tena sarvam idam ātmasaṁvidā

siddhim eti nahi jātv asahyatām || 268 |I
‘The clarity of one’s own consciousness is the fundamental (basis of the

knowledge that comes from) the teacher, scripture and oneself — that is primarily
(where) this effort has been made.
The teacher is rendered dependent on the manner (of instruction) of the
scriptures and that is established in the consciousness of one’s own Self. Thus, all of this
is accomplished by one’s own consciousness, indeed, not without (its) assistance.

etac chāstraṁ prayatnena carcyatāṁ he mumukṣavaḥ |

mā vr̥thaivāyur āyastam anyaśāstreṣu nīyatām || 269 ||

abhedadrṛṣṭir yā kācid bhedadṛṣṭir athāpi vā |
sātraivāyāti nirvāhaṁ tenaitat pravicāryatām || 270 ||
svapnakālaparijñātavī yathā tathā | (?)
etacchāstrasamabhyāsaprabuddhahṛdayaḥ sadā || 271 ||
svasaṁvid eva tacchāstraṁ sā cāpekṣāvivarjitā |
tathā yady abhidhīyeta svataḥ prāmāṇyam ucyatām |272l|
Śāsanaṁ śāsitavyaṁ ca śāsakaṁ ceti yat kila |
tat tatrākālakalitaṁ svātantryādvaitasuṇdaram || 273 ||
O you (all) who aspire to liberation reflect with effort on that scripture (śāstra).
May you not end your life (exerting yourselves) in other scriptures. Whatever nondualist
or dualist view it may be, it ultimately concludes here alone, so you should reflect on
that. (?) May your Heart be always awake by practicing that. That scripture is
one’s own consciousness alone and that is free of (all) dependence. If one speaks in that
way, then say that that is (what is meant by) self-validation (svataḥ prāmāṇyam). The
teaching, what is to be taught and the one who teaches — that is there eternal and
beautiful with the nonduality of freedom.’ MVV 2/267-273

1 See above, 4/41cd-42ab and note. 4/78d is KiT 9/14b. Maheśvarānanda (MM p. 6),

most probably drawing from the Tantrāloka, also quotes these two sources together, as

here. yad uktaṁ śrīniśāṭane — tripratyayam idaṁ jñānam iti, which corresponds to TĀ

4/78cd-79.
Amongst Monier-William’s dictionary definitions of the word pratyaya, along with
‘conception, assumption, notion, idea’ and others, we find ‘belief, firm conviction, trust,
faith, assurance or certainty of, proof, ascertainment (as pratyayaṁgam), to acquire
confidence, repose in [conviction as in the statement] asty atra pratyayo mama — ‘that is
my conviction’ and kaḥ pratyayo ‘tra, what assurance is there of that?” Jayaratha

understands the word in this context to mean ‘cause’, and so 1 have translated
accordingly. It would perhaps be better to understand it to mean something like
‘conviction’. The teacher, scripture and personal insight are touchstones that serve as a

check to instil conviction that the knowledge an ‘uncreated’ teacher already has of the
teachings, and consequently of reality, is correct.

TANTRĀLOKA

Thusṣ, as even an ‘uncreated’ teacher requires a teacher and the rest, (in
such cases,) it is said in the venerable Kiraṇa and elsewhere, that the teacher

and the rest are the three causes (kāraṇa) of knowledge of the supreme reality.
(This knowledge) ‘shines (variously,) according to whether (these three
operate) in unisonʼ etc. in the aforestated manner. The meaning is that it shines
radiantly, as proved by everybody’s (personal) experience. ‘In unison’ means
collectively. ‘In the reverse order’ means other than the stated sequential
order. (Thus,) although knowledge has arisen (spontaneously) for someone from
himsṣelf, it is completed by (referring to) a teacher and scripture. This is the
point. The intention (behind his saying that each one may operate)
‘individually’ is that for some, knowledge arises by just one (of these sources),
for example, the teacher. This is the intended meaning.
Surely (one may ask,) if the cause of knowledge of the supreme reality
is all (three) together, that is, the teacher and the rest, why does he refer to them
individually (also as such)? Or (again), if they each individually (serve as the

source of knowledge) and (s0) the task is accomplished by just one of them,
then what is the use of (any one of) the others? With this doubt in mind, he says:

āvraz fāftrrcaṅtzftamā aī fōsaq

karaṇasya vicitratvād vicitrām eva tāṁ chidam |
kartuṁ vāsīṁ ca taṅkaṁ ca krakacaṁ cāpi gṛhṇate || 80 |l
tāvac ca chedanaṁ hy ekaṁ tathaivādyābhisaṁdhitaḥ |
One makes use of a hatchet, axe or saw in order to make various
(kinds of) cuts (in a piece of wood), because this (variety) depends on the
variety of the tool. Even so, the act of cutting (in itself) is essentially one and

the same, insofar as the intention (abhisaṁdhi) which precedes it is such.

(80-81ab)

A carpenter, for example, makes use of all or just one of (his) tools, ‘in
order to (make various) cutsʼ, that is, split (a piece of wood) in two in that

(particular) way, because the best tool to accomplish the task of cutting (in some
particular way), such as a hatchet, varies. This is the meaning of this statement.

Just as in daily life a large piece of pine wood can be cut up in various ways
with (just) a hatchet or the like, in the same way crooked (cuts can be made in it
or) hollows (cut out of it) and so on by (making use of several cutting tools)
together. This is the intended (sense).

The term abhisaṁdhi and cognate abhisaṁdhāna denote both ‘connecting together’

and ‘intention’, in the sense of desire to do something, conditioned by whether one

wants to avoid something one does not want or take up something desired, which is at

the root of the commerce of daily life (vyavahārā). Intention or desires thus presupposes
an ascertainment or decision (niścaya) as to what is desirable or otherwise, and thus the
conjunction (abhisaṁdhi) of perceptions and notions etc. See ĪPVY 1, p. 253.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

Surely (one may ask,) there is no dispute that the result is various

according to the variety of instrumental causes, and so because the tool, for

example, a hatchet, differs (from another tool), the act of cutting varies
accordingly. So how is it that, whether taken individually or collectively, they

only do one job?" With this doubt in mind, he says ‘even so’ etc. ‘The act of
cutting’ carried out by a particular tool, such as a hatchet, is not (in itself)
various (for each tool), ‘as the intention which precedes it is such’, that is, the

desire to cut (up a piece of wood, for example) is one (and the same). In this
way, there is nothing wrong with the hatchet and the like, whether collectively
or individually, serving as tools for the same act of cutting. The point (implicitly
being made here) is that the object of awareness is diverse because the (form of)

awareness is s0.”

He (now) relates this (example) to the main point.

TITTTTTT-T TTĪSĒT 3ĒTĪ I ¢3 I

JṢT̄ ṬHITIHTTTRTNĪṢĒT: TR: I ¢3 I
ittham eva mitau vācyaṁ karaṇasya svakaṁ vapuḥ || 81 I|
na svatantraṁ svato mānaṁ kuryād adhigamaṁ haṭhāt |
pramātrāśvāsaparyanto yato ‘dhigama ucyate || 82 ||
āśvāsaś ca vicitro ‘sau śaktipātavaśāt tathā |

pramite ‘pi pramāṇānām avakāśo ‘sty ataḥ sphuṭaḥ | 83 ||

The same can be said with regards to an instrument’s own specific

form applied to knowledge (miti). The means of knowledge (māna) is not
independent (in such a way) that it can, by itself, abruptly (haṭhāt) generate
understanding. This is because it is said that understanding (must)
culminate in the firm belief (and satisfaction) (āśvāsa) of the subject (that
he has indeed understood and overcome doubt). And this firm belief (and

satisfaction) varies according to the (intensity) of the descent of the power

(of grace) (śaktipāta). This is the reason why (many) means of knowledge
Read kāryaṁ for kārya.

I have reversed the order of these last two sentences with respect to the printed
edition.
? What is meant here by the plurality of the ‘means of knowledge’ is not only a variety

of means by which the object of knowledge is known; it also denotes a plurality of

cognitive acts. The ‘means of knowledge’ is one of the three modalities of
consciousness, along with the subject and object, in which it manifests and operates.
Emerging from the subjective aspect, channelled through the senses, the means of
knowledge is a stream of cognitive consciousness that extends out to the objective

aspect as the means whereby the subjective aspect perceives it and so is a perceiving
subject in relation to it. This principle applies to whatever form the cognitive stream

TANTRĀLOKA

clearly find application, even in the case of something that has already been

known (but which the subject is not fully satisfied he has understood).

(81cd-83)

‘The instrument’ (of knowledge) is the teacher or the like. It has ‘its
own specific form’, which (it does not share) in common with anything else,
and is (applied to) ‘knowledge’, that is, the knowledge that comes from sound

discriminative reasoning (tarkajñāna). ‘The same can be said’ (about the

means of knowledge) in the stated manner, that is, (that they can be applied)
indiviḍually or collectively. Although reality can be understood by means of

just one of (these means,) for example, the teacher, even so, until the need of the

perceiver comes to rest, they are applied (and useful) individually or
collectively. This is the intended (meaning). Thus, the means of knowledge,
because it is (just a) means of knowledge, is not independent such that it can
impart understanding by force independently of the perceiver. Understanding is
(the awareness that) ‘I have known this thing’. Such is the subject’s ultimate

conviction (and satisfaction) (āśvāsa). If that has not arisen, what has been

understood (adhigamārtha)? (In response to this question, we say that if he is
not fully satisfied that he has understood, it does not mean that he knows
nothing); this conviction (and satisfaction depends on) the type (and degree of)
the descent of the power (of grace), that is, according to whether it is most
intense (or less s0) and so on. In that way, it is varied according to whether it is
progressively most intense (or less so0) and so on. The intended meaning is that
it is because of (the variety and degree of grace) that (this conviction) arises by
means of the teacher (scripture and one’s own insight), collectively or
individually. There is nothing logically wrong in making use of other means of
knowledge because the perceiver is not convinced (of having understood) the

nature of something (or a teaching), even if it has already been known (to some

degree) externally (but not fully inwardly).
Surely (one may ask,) if the aggregate (of the factors required for
perception to take place), that is, the object, light and the rest, are not present
together (saṁghaṭitā), that (particular) cognition (jñāna) does not arise, and so

what has been understood (adhigamārtha) there (in that case)? Now if (all the

necessary conditions for perception) are present together, then the perceiver
should know the unknown entity (he wished to know the very moment) the

initial contact with the senses (takes place), without need of any other (ulterior)

validating perception (pratyaya). Again, even if this is so, and fluxes of
perceptions arise there subsequently, let them arise, what is wrong (with that)?

(However,) there (in that case), they would not be means of knowledge. (This is

because) something new (apūrvārtha) (that was not known before) is made
manifest only by the very first moment of perception (but not by the subsequent

ones). (The definition of) a means of knowledge is the manifestation of

something new (not known previously). As they say:

may assume. This includes not just direct perception, but also inference, as well as the
verbal testimony of a teacher, apt authority or scripture.
The implied answer is: ‘nothing at all, as no object of knowledge is perceivable (or
indeed exists as an object of knowledge) if all the necessary attendant conditions that
make perception possible are not present together.”


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

‘A means of knowledge (is defined as having) as its object (an entity)

not (as yet) known, or (to put it another way) it is the (cognitive) light (that

illumines) something that is unknown.’

The fruit the perceiver possesses (by applying a means of knowledge) is
just this, namely, ‘I have known this thing’, because he considers (himself) to be
satisfied in this way. And that does not arise with respect to the subsequent
streams of perceptions. So how is it said that ‘the means of knowledge find
application even in the case of something that has already been known’? With
this doubt in mind, he says:

r̥xaṝ gazā? gāīvvs F=Ṝ gaē s=rāī |

fraṝ ã ũ̄Ṁsã ftk rg: kv at

1A

dṛṣṇ ā dṛṣṭvā samāśliṣya ciraṁ sañcarvya cetasā |
yaiḥ parituṣyeta kiṁ brūmaḥ kila tān prati || 84 II
(There is nothing wrong in the view that a means of knowledge can
find further application to an object already known), for what should we
say of those who are (only) satisfied when they have seen the beloved

repeatedly (countless times), embraced her and relished the thought of her

at length?

(The statement) ‘seen (the beloved) repeatedly (countless times) or
the words ‘at length’ (implies that) by ‘seeing’ is also meant embracing (the

beloved repeatedly) and relishing (the thought of her presence at length). (What
is meant) by that is that (even though) the beloved is (already) known, (the lover
who perceives her is only finally) satisfied by countless actively applied
(pravṛtta) means of knowledge, that is, perceptions of (her) form and touch and

the thoughts that follow after. So ‘what should we say of those’ (who do this)?
There is no contradiction at all in one’s experience that something is known in
the first moment of perception, and (many such moments may be required) until
the perceiver is ultimately satisfied. Thus (one view is that):

‘What other unperceived aspect could there be of the nature of a single
entity that is itself directly perceived, which (needs to be) examined by (various

other) means of knowledge?”

This line is also quoted above in TĀv ad 1/54 (see note there) and ad 1/180cd-181ab.

Read with MSs C and Ch and as grammar demands, priyāṁ for priyā.

Pramāṇavārttika 1/43. Also quoted below ad 9/12. In the commentary on his own
work, Dharmakīrti writes:

tasya pratyakṣenaiva siddheḥ sarvākārasiddhiḥ | tadānyasyāsiddhasyābhāvāt |

bhāve vā ʻtatsvabhāvatvam | na hi yo yad ekayogakṣemo na bhavati sa tatsvabhāvo
yuktaḥ | tanmātranibandhanatvād bhedavyavahārasya | anyathā ‘bhāvaprasaṅgād ity
uktam | tasmāt pratyakṣe dharmiṇi tatṣyvabhāvasākalyaparicchedāt tatrānavakāśā

pramāṇāntaravṛttiḥ syāt

TANTRĀLOKA

(But) the point is that this statement is not a sound view. Thus:

‘Wherever (something is specifically) determined by (other) subsequent

means of knowledge, (it means that) there (in that case) also, that entity was

certainly not apprehended in the same way by the previous (one).”

According to this view, expressed (in this and other ways), it must
certainly be the case that some new aspect (of the perceived object) not known

by a previous means of knowledge is known by other means of knowledge, so
that finally (when they have all been applied), the perceiver may be satisfied. As
others (say,) on the contrary:

‘Certainly, subsequent (applications of) means of knowledge do not

(give rise to) more (specific) determination (of their object). What more (can)

manifest in the streams of perceptions (bodha) (that is not already known once
something has been perceived)?
It is said (here in this way that) the streams of perceptions (vijñāna) are
(still) valid means of knowledge, although they perceive what has already been
perceived. That is not sound, because (if that were so, the application of further
means of knowledge would be) useless, and countless (other) such defects

(would) arise. Therefore, (a previously) unknown entity is known even when
there is a flowing together of countless applications of (many) means of
knowledge, even with regard to just one thing (artha), and so the (application
of) other means of knowledge is not without purpose, because they also
manifest a novel entity. If this were to be so, then the subsequent streams of
perceptions would be (constantly) spontaneously engaged (in perception), and
the manifestation of (some) novel entity would never cease (to take place). Thus

also, (by adopting our view,) there would be no infinite regress, because there is
an end (each time to the streams of perception) which cannot be transgressed,
namely, the satisfaction the perceiver (experiences that he has known the object

he wishes to know).

Moreover, by the perceivers application of many means of knowledge
(coordinated) together to just one entity in this way, a novel manifestation

arises. Thus, (whereas) their (view entails that) the validity of the subsequent
“When (the nature of something) has been established by direct perception, (its)

entire form has been established. This is because there is nothing else that has not been

established (siddha). Or else if that were to exist, it would not be of that nature. It is not

reasonable (to maintain) that that which is incapable of being conjoined together as one
(thing) be of that nature. This is because the daily business of relative distinctions

(bhedavyahāra) is regulated solely by that. If it were to be otherwise, it is said that that
is because it does not exist, which is an undesirable contingency. Therefore (an entity)
that possesses the quality of being directly perceived is such because its nature has been
determined completely. There (in that case) there would be no occasion for the
operation of another means of knowledge.” Edition by Gnoli (1960) p. 26.

The stream of cognitive awareness is not without end, exposing one after another
infinite aspects, thus resulting in an infinite regress; rather, it continues only until the
subject is satisfied. This possibility is not open to the Buddhist opponent who, denying
the existence of a perceiver, maintains that all that exists is the stream of cognitive
consciousness.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


(perceptions) depends on the previous ones, and the previous ones on the
subsequent ones, here (in our view), there is also no (such) vicious circle. This
is because (according to us) the validity (of perceptions) is not mutually
dependent (on one another). The validity of perceptions depends on the novelty
of the manifestation (prakāśa — lit. ‘light’) of the object (artha), and that light
(of consciousness) which has as its object (some) novel entity is the (specific)

separate condition of all things (as this or that). So what occasion could there be
for (this kind of) vicious circle? It is said concerning the concurrence (of many
valid perceptions together) (saṁplava) with respect to (a single entity that
possesses many) properties (dharmin), that many means of knowledge operate
in the case of just one entity. (However,) in actual fact, on the contrary, some

particuḻar attribute of an entity (dharmin) which is qualified by many attributes
is made manifest as novel by some (means of knowledge, and others by
others). Thus, once the perceiver has known the possessor of these attributes
completely by first coming to know each particular attribute, he ultimately

becomes satisfied.


He says that:


ST 1| ¢&1
itthaṁ ca māãnasaṁplutyām api nādhigate gatiḥ |
na vyarthatā nānavasthā nānyonyāśrayatāpi ca |l 85 ||
Now, although the means of knowledge concur to act together in

this way, (this does not entail the fallacies) of apprehending something

already known, or of (their application) being useless. (Nor does it entail)

an infinite regress or vicious circle (anyonyāśrayatā).

Now, concluding (this discussion concerning) the true nature of a

teacher, which is related to that of the true nature of discriminative reasoning,

A single object (dharmin) may be specified by many qualities, and so may be the
object of many means of knowledge that serve to identify it.

Pramāṇa — here translated a ‘means of knowledge'- is a stream of cognitive
gnosis of the subject, eternally viewing itself in this way as the object. Thus variety
(vicitratā) does not compromise the unification of experience, which is the Absolute in
this system. The object is flooded with streams of cognitive awareness that apprehend

now this aspect, now that. Thus, the contradiction does not arise that the means of
knowledge makes apparent something already known, which would not be knowledge at
all.

Swami Lakshmanjoo explains: “There is always something more to realize. Like

undressing a woman, embracing her and having sex with her, there is always more. It is
not ‘useless’ as the Buddhists think, who consider that once an object has been

perceived there is no further means to cognition. Nor is it an infinite regress, because in
realizing God Consciousness you realize more and more from the Master, from scripture
and from what you can experience. The Buddhists object to this view, saying that it is an
anavasthā [infinite regress].

TANTRĀLOKA

next he goes on, as announced in the initial enunciation (of the topics of the

Tantrāloka), to talk about the inapplicability of the ancillaries of Yoga.

The Uselessness of the Ancillaries of Yoga (yogāṅgānupayogitva)

ṁ t 7 Tg |
TāīTT: ṬāTYTTIRTITTJIATTI ā: II ¢E I
evaṁ yogāṅgam iyati tarka eva na cāparam ḷ

antarantaḥ parāmarśapātavātiśayāya saḥ || 86 ||
"Tn this way, (there is ultimately only one) ancillary of Yoga
(yogāṅga) which is (established to be) such, namely, discriminative

" unṃeṣamātrarūḍhasya sā nirmūlā na (> ca) saṁbhavet |
itthaṁ kūṁ bahunoktena naye ‘nuttaranāmani |1105||
vastuto 'sti na kasyāpi yogāṅgasyābhyupāyatā |

svarūpaṁ hy asya nīṝrāpam avacchedavivarjanāt I1O6II

upāyo ‘py anupāyo 'syāyāgavr̥tinirodhataḥ (-syāyogyavṛtti-) |

recanāpūraṇair eṣā rahitā tanuvātanauḥ (> tanuś cātanoḥ) |107 II

tārayaty evam ātmānaṁ bhedasāgaragocarāt |

nimañjamānam apy etanmano vaiṣayike rase ||1O8II
‘And for one who is well established in the expansion (of consciousness) alone,

(Māyā) is without root. In this way, what is the use of speaking much in this doctrine

(naya) called Anuttara? In actual fact, the ancillaries of Yoga are of no use as a means
to anything. The form (svarūpa) (of Anuttara) is that it has no form because it is devoid
of (any) defining limitations (avaccheda). Although a means, it is no means (anupāya),
because (nothing is attained, all that takes place is that the yogi’s) states (and activities)
(vṛṇi) that are unfit (for the attainment of realisation) are blocked. This body of the
disembodied one (i.e. Anuttara) is devoid of the exhalations and inhalations (of the

practice of breath control). In this way, (Anuttara) makes the Self cross over the sphere
of the ocean of saṁsāra, even though this mind plunges into the juice (of the aesthetic
delight) (rasa) of the objects of sense.' MVV 2/105-108

? Abhinava has a line in mind from the MV that declares that ‘(Sound intuitive)

Reasoning is the most excellent ancillary of Yoga (yogāṅga).’ (MV 17/18ab, quoted in
TĀv ad 1/9 and ad 4/18cd-19ab) Here he goes a step further by saying that it is the only
one. Or to put it another way, the development of insight is the path to realization; the
practice of the ‘limbs’ or ancillaries of Yoga are of no use if they do not contribute to
that development. Conversely, if they do, they are essentially the insight of Sound

Reasoning anyway. In other words, Abhinava is replacing Yoga with liberating gnosis.
Abhinava does describe and support a range of yogic practices throughout the

Tantrāloka. But these are not part of a system of yogic praxis with ‘limbs’ or
‘ancillaries'. Indeed, it is clear from the passage quoted in the following note that he

does not consider Yoga in itself to be liberating, although he does admit, as we shall see

further ahead, that it can be if it leads to insight. In other words, from Abhinava’s

gnoseological standpoint, for Yoga to be functional, it must be grounded and sustained
by the development of insight, which is both its ultimate goal and the means to it. In this
perspective, he does allow a place for the practice of Yoga, but even so, he also

maintains the hard line expressed in the passage quoted in the following note, that Yoga
is of no use at all, if only to emphasise that insight is ultimately all it is about.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


reasoning (tarka), and none other, bestowing as it does an ever more
internal and excellent capacity for reflective awareness.

As the object of inquiry, which is the nature of the teacher, has been
established ‘in this way to be such’, (it follows that) discriminative reasoning
alone is the most excellent ‘limb of Yoga’. Moreover, this amounts to saying

that there is none other at all, including the prohibitions (yama) and the rest (of

the standard ancillaries of Yoga), that may give rise, as (the realisation of pure)
consciousness draws progressively closer, to ‘an ever more internal and
excellent capacity for reflective awareness’ʼ, that is, Pure Knowledge, so that
(finally) in the end, the Yogi may experience supreme consciousness directly.

That is said (in the following passage,) which begins:

‘The deliberation (iiha) of the dispassionate one who has attained the

plane (of Yoga) is the statement of sound reasoning and the observation of
discernment, charmingly adorned with the conquest of that (supreme reality). As
is the level of the place presided over (by its own form of) worldly experience

which, transitory, is rooted in doubt, so is it sullied (with these impurities).

What use is that? Enough of this daily commerce of views (generated) by
thought constructs. (The place of our own insight,) fulfilled with (our own)
special (and excellent) worldly experience, is other than that.”

And ends with:


‘The most excellent plane of those who have attained (that) plane which
is the profound vision of one’s own (innate) radiant energy (svatejas) is, free of

(false) reasoning and suffering,™ the sole abode of the Lord. Those who desire

liberation should abandon the other (planes which are under the sway of false)
reasoning. O lion amongst the sages, those who practice Yoga cannot give up
those (lower planes) without sound discriminative reasoning. And so it is right
also to make use of (sound) discriminative reasoning. It has become an ancillary

(of Yoga) for Yogis and serves to help them.’

We should not forget that Abhinava is saying this in the context of his
exposition of the Empowered category practice, which is based on the ‘purification of
thought’ through the development of insight.

Instead of anāturam — ‘free of suffering’, MS Kh and T read anuttaram.
Abhinava appears to be referring to this line in the following passage in his

Maālinīvijayavārtika, in which he outlines the difference between Sound Reasoning
(tarka, sattarka) and what dualist logicians and Buddhists call logic:

‘In this way, the god Maheśvara abides as all things, and is worshipped
(upāsyate) by means of knowledge (that develops) progressively and Yoga, and by
(various forms of) meditation (dharaṇā) (as we find, for example, in the
Vijñānabhairava). Reality (tattva), which is the sequence of principles (tattvakrama)

free of the net of Māyā, that

is, the Impurity of duality, is rightly discerned in the

eighteenth chapter (of the Mālinīvijayottara), where it is said that (it is) where breath
control and the rest (of the limbs of Yoga) should be abandoned. There is no means (of
realization) with respect to its supreme consciousness. (1-3) [MV 18/19 quoted in TĀ

4/107]

TANTRĀLOKA

How can that which is blocked all around within consciousness, the form of

which is the vital breath and the intellect, move inwardly within this (consciousness)?
(If you say that it is possible) ‘in this way, (then pray make) a program (krama) of the
(appropriate) practice (abhyāsa) of Yoga. Those who are intensely engaged in this
consciousness in order to purify it by the path of practice, what, where, from whence,

and how can they apply it? This is what we know here (in this case, namely, that it is not

possible).
Practice is something that is repeated again and again, and that too (is only
possible) because there are differences between (moments of) time and locations (in
space), and it arises due to the association of (one) manifestation with another (which
differs from it) on the path of the body, mind, vital breath and senses.

Those meditations (dhāraṇā) which seek to discern (reality) within Bhairava’s

nature, which is the compact (uninterrupted) light (of consciousness), are well
established within it by resting (there) in the consciousness which has shone forth (just)
once (and forever). Thus here (in this case), the limb (of Yoga) which is said to be
supreme and serves to help all (the others) (i.e. saṭtarka) is the means (dvāra) by which
(this supreme reality) is realized (niścita), (and so those meditations) are also of that
nature (whereby they attain their goal). (6-7)

Surely, (an opponent may object:) what faith could one conceive to have in

reasoning (tarka) which (invariably) has no (sound) basis (apratiṣṭha)? Indeed (hanta),
are not your words (also), in the same way, without (sound) basis? In the same way,
(this objection applies to all means of knowledge. Thus,) there are those who are
convinced (niścita) that scripture alone is the one (certain) means of knowledge
(pramāṇa). (But) how can one determine that (reality) with certainty, when the mass of
scriptures are (mutually) contradictory? (If you reply that) there (in that case), the cause
of the validity of (that) means of knowledge is what is well known to great (learned and
realized) people, (that also has) no (sound) basis, as it is quite well possible that (the
teachings of these) great people concerning that (reality) are (also mutually)
contradictory. (8-10)
(Such is the case with) direct perception also, which is a perception (sarīvid) in
which (something that) sublates (and corrects it is) perceived (only) according to (one’s)
needs. (Moreover, as it requires) further ulterior perceptions (to confirm it, and these
too, subsequent ones, the knowledge derived from direct perception is subject) to an
infinite regress. Surely, (the opponent continues,) there (in that case also), what
(certainty remains) of one’s own perception (svasaṁvid) when it has been sublated
(bādhita) (by another one)? (11-12ab)

(To these objections we reply,) how can (this opponent,) who is skilled in

(connecting together and) contemplating (saṁdhāna) duality, fashion (all this common

reality) consisting of the business of daily life (vyavahāra)? At no time and nowhere (in
any circumstance) are we devoid of a sound basis (for our knowledge of reality). Those

(like us) who everywhere possess the completely full and supreme ocean of Bhairava
(consciousness) are not devoid of (a sound) basis, especially (in their) reasoning. (12cd-

14ab)

AII those ancillaries of reasoning (tarkāṁśa) that have not contemplated their
own (inherent) consciousness anywhere (in any circumstance) attain the ultimate fruit,
which is Śiva, as do those who (grounded in Bhairava) have attained the supreme nectar
of consciousness by crossing over the ocean of (unsound) reason. (14cd-15)
Nonduality is the essence of all the meaning of the scriptures. It is foolish
people (miḍhadhī) who are devoted to the difference that is (provisionally) perceived
there, in order to realize that (essential oneness of their nondual purport).
And (sound) reasoning alone is skilled in refuting the reasoned arguments that
are the ancillaries of dualism (bhedavāda). Surely (then, the opponent finally rejoins,


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Surely (one may ask,) if sound discriminative reasoning is a limb of

Yoga the same (as are the others), why is just that (considered to be) the best

limb of Yoga, and not the prohibitions (yama) and the rest (of the other
ancillaries)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

3ā TdHīTG aTRIĪSJṬTTḤ I ¢¢ 1
ahiṁsā satyam asteyabrahmacaryāparigrahāḥ |
iti paīñca yamāḥ sākṣāt saṁvittau nopayoginaḥ l| 87 |I
tapaḥ prabhṛtayo ye ca niyamā yat tathāsanam |

prāṇāyāmāś ca ye sarvam etad bāhyavijrmbhitam || 88 |I
(There are) five prohibitions (yama), namely, (one should) not
iṇjure living beings (ahiṅiṣā), tell lies (satya), steal (asteya), indulge in sexual
intercourse (brahmacaryā), or be miserly (parigraha). (These) and
injunctions (niyama) such as the practice of austerity (tapas) and the like,
the

various

bodily

postures

(āsana)

and

(types

of)

breath

control

(prāṇāyāma), have no direct application to consciousness. (In fact,) they all
operate externally (and have nothing to do with inner consciousness). (87-

88)

‘And the like refers to ‘cleanliness” and the rest (of the injunctions).

As is said (in the Yogasūtra):

‘(The five) injunctions (niyama) are cleanliness (śauca), contentment
(santoṣa),
ausṣterity
(tapas),
study,
and
reverence
for
God

(īśvarapraṇidhāna).

you are saying that) reasoning does have some application to (the one) nondual (reality).

(To which we reply) that that too is not unreasonable, when the view is that of supreme

nonduality (according to which everything is a manifestation of consciousness and
hence real, according to the manner in which it appears).’ MVV 2/1-18ab

After declaring that these two ancillares of Patañjali’s Yoga are of no use to

attaining liberation, Abhinava goes on in the following verses to say the same about the

rest of them.

YSū 2/30. The five prohibitions and five injunctions are listed in YSū 2/30-32. The

following is a summary by Rama Shankar Bhattacarya of the explanation given of them
in the Yogabhāṣya: ‘Non-violence is absolute abstinence from malice. Truth-telling (i.e.
abstinence from lying) is the correspondence of speech and thought to fact. A true

sentence must not delude others or create a wrong notion in others or appear
meaningless to its hearer. Non-theft means abstention from taking things illegally that
belong to others. Celibacy is the control of the organ of generation by a person who is
the master of his senses. Non-avarice is to desist from taking things, with the
observation that their acquisition etc. breeds frustration.

TANTRĀLOKA

In this way all the others also ‘have no direct application to

consciousnessʼ. This is the connected (sense). By saying ‘directly’, he also
implies those that could be applicable indirectly (pāramparyeṇa). The reason
why they are not applicable directly is because ‘they all operate externally°.
That is not established just by reason alone; (this view) is also
(sustained) by the scriptures. Thus, he says:

JG JĪTTITaT 1| ¢ 1

cšṝ ahTR aīl a-̄N

J. T J HĨI- 82 1|

śrīmadvīrāvalau coktaṁ bodhamātre śivātmake |
cittapralayabandhena pralīne śaśibhāskare || 89 ||

prāpte ca dvādaśe bhāge jīvāditye svabodhake |
mokṣaḥ sa eva kathitaḥ prāṇāyāmo nirarthakaḥ | 90 |I
prāṇāyāmo na kartavyaḥ śarīraṁ yena pīḍyate |
rahasyaṁ vetti yo yatra sa muktaḥ sa ca mocakaḥ || 91 11

Itis saidin the venerable Virāvali: “By dissolving the one-pointed

mind into Śiva’s nature, which is just (pure awakened) consciousness

(bodhamātra), the Moon (of apāna) and the Sun (of prāṇa) dissolve away.

Purification is either external (by using external things) or internal (i.e. removal
of the impurities of awareness). Contentmentis the absence of desire for more than
immediate necessities. Ascetic exercise is the ability to bear extremes. Vowis included

in it. Study/recitation is either the reading of authoritative texts on liberation or the

repeating of OṀ. Focusing on God is offering up all actions to him.’ Encyclopedia of

Indian Philosophies. Vol. 12 p. 199-200.

The same phrase appears in the Stanzas on Vibration:


yām avasthāṅṁ samālambya tad ayaṁ mama vakṣaṭi |

tad avaśyaṁ kariṣye ʻham iti saṁkalpya tiṣṭhati || 23 |
tām āśrityordhvamārgeṇa candrasūryāv ubhāv api |

sauṣumne ‘dhvany astamito hatvā brahmāṇḍagocarāt || 24 |
tadā tasmin mahāvyomni pralīnaśaśibhāskare |

sauṣuptapadavan mūḍhaḥ prabuddhaḥ syād anāvṛtaḥ l| 25 II
‘Once having entered that state which (the yogi) takes as his support and firmly

resolves that: “I will surely do whatever He says”, both the Sun and Moon set, following
the ascending way into the channel of suṣumnā, once having abandoned the sphere of
the universe, then in that great Sky, when the Sun and Moon dissolve away, the dull

minded (yogi is cast down) into a state like that of deep sleep. The awakened however

remains lucid.’ SpKā 23-25


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


(Then, when) the Sun of Life (jīvāditya), which is one’s own
consciousness, reaches the twelfth part (of the End of the Twelve), that is

said to be liberation. Breath control is useless. Breath control, which

(merely) inflicts pain on the body, should not be practiced. He who knows
(this) secret is both liberated and liberates (others).”” (89-91)

The ‘dissolving away of the mind’ is the state of rest (viśrānti) within
the sentient subject (cetayitr)™ (attained) by the progressive assimilation of
The Praśnopaniṣad identifies the vital breath — prāṇa — with the sun. When it rises in

the East and then enters the other directions, it gathers up the vital breaths into its rays.
The Upaniṣad goes on to declare that: “That very one rises who is prāṇa and fire, who is
identified with all creatures . . . (Those who realised the Brahman knew) the one that is
possessed of all forms, full of rays, endowed with illumination, the resort of all, the

single light (of all), and the radiator of heat. It is the sun that rises — the sun that
possesses a thousand rays, exists in a hundred forms and is the life (prāṇa) of all
creatures. (1/6-8)

The mind, well concentrated, dissolves into Śiva’s pure awakened consciousness as

the breath, inhalation and exhalation, spontaneously fuse and flow into the Centre

between them. As the Upward Moving inner breath, it rises like a fire up through
suṣumnā, consuming objectivity as it moves up to the End of the Twelve, where
individual consciousness, now divested of all restrictions, fuses into Śiva consciousness.
This is authentic breath control, which liberates the fettered soul.
The wording of this line is exactly the same as in Jayaratha’s citation, so there can be
no doubt that he had access to the Virāvalītantra.

! Notice that the context in which Abhinava is quoting the Vārāvalī is to state that in
the Empowered Means (Śāktopāya), the ancillaries of Yoga, of which breath control is

an example, are of no use. In other words, these verses are not at all meant to be ‘a
definition of liberation’. Abhinava quotes them as an authority for this practice, which
begins by concentrating the mind and so dissolving it away (by purifying it of thought).

In this case, the insight of the still mind leads to a fusion of the two breaths (Śun and
Moon), corresponding, in cognitive terms, to the union of the senses (= the Sun of the

means of knowledge) with their object (= the Moon). This union takes place by entry
into suṣumnā, in which they rise as the Upward Moving breath (udāna = Kuṇḍalinī). In
cognitive terms, the fusion takes place progressively into the perceiver (= Fire). As
Kuṇḍalinī rises, subjectivity develops, until at the culmination of the ascent the pure
liberating subjectivity of Śiva dawns as the Upward Moving breath, and merges into the
highest level of its ascent (= the End of the Twelve). In other words, cognitive and
prāṇic Yogas operating together lead to liberation from the objectivity that constricts
consciousness. This process is initiated by concentration, which culminates in the
dissolving away of the mind. When that happens, the rest follows automatically,
including breath retention.

” The ‘sentient subject’ — cetayitṛ is the subjectivity that perceives the activity of the
mind — citta. The mind in this sense is made of the objects of mental perceptions - cetya

— of the sentient subject. The triad — cetayitr, citta and cetya — sentient subject, mind and
objects of mental perceptions — operate on the worldly plane of daily life. By paying
aṭtention to the sentient subject, that is, the perceiving consciousness that views the
activity of the mind (citta), which generates and is its objects of mental perception
(cetya), thīs activity gradually comes to a halt as the mind becomes more one-pointed.

The activity of the mind, perception and the movement of the breath are intimately
connected and take place in parallel. When the mind is agitated, the breath becomes so

also; conversely, as the mind becomes still, so does the breathing. When the mind

TANTRĀLOKA

comes to rest by dissolving away its objects by one-pointed attention to their perceiver,
the breath also comes to rest by entering suṣumnā. This channel of the vital breath is
called the Central Abode (madhyamadehāman) because the breath that flows through it
is the Central Breath (madhyamaprāṇa). According to the Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣad,

which is one of the earliest Upaniṣads, the Central Breath is the immortal breath of life

that gives life to the body, senses and mind. There we read that: ‘Prajāpati (the Lord of

the Creatures) emitted the activities (of the senses). These once emitted, quarrelled with
one another. The organ of speech took a vow: “I will go on speaking”. The eye: “ḹ will

see”. The ear: “I will hear”. And so did the other organs according to their functions.
Death captured them in the form of fatigue — it overtook them, and having overtaken
them, it controlled them. Therefore, the organ of speech invariably gets tired and so do
the eye and ear. But it did not overtake the Central Breath (madhyamaḥ prāṇaḥ) (in the

body). (BṛUp 1/5/21)

Physiologies of the vital breath related to states of consciousness are very

ancient. The early Upaniṣads already describe the conduits along which the vital breath

travels. The breath moves through them, up and down, out and into the body, and with it
travels the individual soul, who is thereby transported through various states of
consciousness. In the same Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣad (2/1/19) we read:
‘Now when one falls sound asleep (suṣupta), when one knows nothing
whatsoever, having crept out through the seventy-two thousand channels called hitā,

which lead from the heart to the pericardium, one rests in the pericardium. Verily, as a

youth or a great king or a great Brahman might rest when he has reached the summit of
bliss, so this one now rests.’ (Hume’s translation)
The most important amongst these channels is the one that leads upwards,

along which the individual who is destined to achieve liberation travels when the body

dies. In the following passage from the same Upaniṣad (4/4/8-9), the sage Yajñavālkya

proclaims he has found this ‘narrow path’ and has travelled on it:
‘The ancient narrow path that stretches far away
Has been touched by me, has been found by me.
By it the wise, the knowers of Brahma, go up

Hence to the heavenly world, released.
On it, they say, is white and blue
And yellow and green and red.
That was the path by Brahma found;

By it goes the knower of Brahma, the doer of right (puṇyakṛt),

And every shining one.’ (translation by Hume)

According to an unnamed source quoted by the Chāndogyopaniṣad, the
channels are only one hundred and one. Of these, the most important is the one along

which the vital breath travels down into the body when, at a certain point in the
development of the foetus, it enters it through a cavity at the top of the head. The vital

breath of those who die knowing the true nature of things and their origin chooses to
travel out of the body by the same channel through which they entered it. Others leave
the body in other ways. Thus this, the last journey of death, is like the little death of

sleep, or the change of consciousness that takes place by the practice of Yoga. The

Chāndogyopaniṣad (8/6/6) declares:


“There are a hundred and one channels of the heart
One of these passes up to the crown of the head.

Going up by it, one goes to immortality.
The others are for departing in various directions.’ (translation by Hume)


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


thought. It is ‘one-pointed’ (bandha), that is, it does not go to anything else. In

that way, the Sun along with the Moon, that is, the flow of exhalation (prāṇa)

and inhalation (apāna) (respectively), ‘set’, and their flow is cut off by merging
into the Central Abode (madhyadhāman). Thuṣ (when that happens), the ‘life’,
which is the ‘Sun’ of the Upward (Moving breath) (udāna), (rīses and is
identified with the inner) Fire, because it takes up (and consumes into itself)

every object of knowledge and the rest which is to be burnt up (by it and fuels
it). Then it reaches the End of the Twelve by the progressive upward flow (of
the breath) in the centre within it, and is mounted on the supreme summit of
existence (parākāṣṭhā) within the perceiver, by uprooting the commerce of daily
life (based on the interplay between) the means and object of knowledge. Then,
when the pure awakened consciousness (bodhamātra), which is self-luminous

and self-awakening, has arisen thus, that particular special, indefinable (kaścir)
experience (he attains) is called ‘liberation’.” As was taught there previously
(in the Vīrāvalītantra):

The understanding of this movement of the breath and the function of the vital

channels led those who sought liberation to attain it by these means directly, by

reproducing what happens at the moment of death. Thus, the first forms of the Yoga of
the vital breath focused on the journey of the soul transported by the breath, along the
‘narrow path’. This came to be called ‘suṣumnā’, to which we find the earliest reference
in the following passage in the Maitryupaniṣad (6/21):
‘Now it has been said elsewhere: ‘there is a channel called ‘suṣumnā̃’, leading
upward, conveying the breath, piercing through the palate. Through it, by joining (yuj)
the breath, the syllable OM, and the mind, one may go aloft. By causing the tip of the
tongue to turn back against the palate and by rubbing together (saryojya) the senses,
one may, as greatness, perceive greatness.' Thence he goes to selflessness. Because of
selflessness, one becomes a non-experiencer of pleasure and pain; he obtains the
absolute unity (kevalatva).’ (translation by Hume) For more details, see Dyczkowski

2009: vol. l1,
p. 195 ff.

” The breathing and cognitive cycle are two of the main aspects of the manifest activity

of consciousness, and so are parallel and equivalent. Thus, according to Abhinava’s
exegesis, the Sun of the exhaled breath (prāṇa) corresponds to the means of knowledge,

and the Moon of the inhaled breath (apāna), the object. The Fire of the upward moving

breath (udāna) of the flow of Kuṇḍalinī corresponds to the subject. At the limited,
conditioned level, the means of knowledge, that is, sensory and mental perception as
well as its object, are so strongly dominant that the perceiver is as if hidden away, like a
slow burning fire under ashes. The Sun and Moon of exhalation and inhalation follow
one another, as do day and night. The breath naturally come to a halt in the space in

between, where the Fire of the upward moving breath rises. The flux of the breath

oscillating between these polarities generates perceptions clothed in thought constructs,

by which the perceiver, who is not a thought construct, is obscured, although the

perceiver is their basis, from which they proceed and into which they return. By

concentrating on the centre between the breaths, the gap between them naturally widens

as the mind stills (‘dissolves away’) and the reflective awareness of the perceiver is

strengthened. No breath controlled is required. The Fire of the upward moving breath
within the perceiver rises spontaneously, consuming the thoughts generated by the
interplay of the two breaths, that feed it like fuel. Ultimately, when the mind has fully
dissolved away and the Fire has fully risen up to the supreme apex of subjectivity

TANTRĀLOKA

‘By the union of the Moon and the Sun, the individual soul becomes

Pure Being,”™ here Brahmā and the rest who long for liberation dissolve away,
s0 as to (achieve) liberation.”

Unlike other teachings (darśana), (this one declares that) one does not
need to make use of (any) other means. Thus ‘breath control’ (which involves
the control of) exhalation etc. ‘is uselessʼ, and so no goal like liberation is

achieved by that (means). This is the point. When the Lord had thus questioned
(Her), in order to establish the teaching concerning the subject (artha) of (his)

question, the Goddess™ (replied in the Vīrāvalītantra), beginning (with the
words):

‘O greatly wise one, this is true (indeed) that breath control is not a
cause (of liberation).” (And concluded): ‘Breath control, which (merely) inflicts
pain on the body, is not to be practiced.”
Having presented with (these words the scriptural) authority which
confutes the view (taught by) others, (he goes on to) present (the scriptural)
authority that establishes our own (view) (with the words): ‘he who knows (this)
secret . . . The secret is the supreme principle, which is the true nature of the
(pure) perceiver alone, (free of all objectivity. It is secret) because it is not
perceivable by everybody, because no means of knowledge and the rest operate
(there). He who knows it and perceives it directly, is himself ‘liberated’, and

being so, ‘liberates’ others also.
(Moreover,) by saying that breath control is useless, that (same) point is

established by extension’” with regards to (the other ancillaries of Yoga,)

beginning with the prohibitions (yana). Thus, they have not been discussed

experienced at the climax of its ascent in the End of the Twelve, the yogi achieves

liberation.
The expression here is: ‘tanmātratāṁ vrajet’,which literally means, ‘goes to the state
of being just that much alone’, that is, just Being Itself.

The union of the Moon of inhalation (apāna) and the Sun of exhalation (prāṇa) takes

place in the centre between them, where they come to rest. Initially, there are two such
places — one below, when the Moon of inhalation sets, before the Sun of exhalation
dawns. The other is above where the Sun of exhalation sets, and the Moon of inhalation

has not yet risen. In this way, the Sun and Moon unite naturally for everybody. For the
Yogi who pays attention to these junctures, his mind with all its thoughts dissolves away

there, and as they merge in perfect Stillness, he experiences the Pure Being of his

essential conscious nature. Brahmā, who governs the element Earth, and the Lords of
the other four Elements, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, Rudra and Sadāśiva, desiring the liberated
state, also dissolve away there with the lower principles, to merge in the Voidness of
Being.

Ṛead bhagavatī praśnārthameva for bhagavatīpraśnārthameva.
” The text reads: ‘daṇḍāpūpīyanyāyena’, which literally means, ‘by the analogy of the
stick and cake’. This is a way of reasoning in which once one fact is established to be
correct, another related one is automatically proved to be so. This manner of extending
the scope of a proof is illustrated by saying that a mouse that has eaten a stick is sure to

eat a cake.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


separately (in the Vāzāvalitantra).” (The reference to) ‘Śiva’s nature, which is

(nothing but pure awakened) consciousness alone (bodhamātra) indicates
implicitly, in brief, what is taught in the previous two chapters (of the

Vīrāvalitantra).”

Surely (one may ask,) if the prohibitions (yama) and the like are not
applicable to (the realisation of) consciousness because they operate externally,

let that be, what is wrong (with that)? However, the withdrawal (of the senses)

and the like are turned away from the external (world), and that being so,
develop inwardly. Thus, why is that also not rightly applicable there (to the

realisation of liberation)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ā-ā āē- fk r-TT 1 < 1

TīTāTTTTTT] SATTITRTTHATITI| RQ3 I

TRTFRTTHTḺTYĀTT gHTRĒT I] % 1

praṅyāhāraś ca nāmāyamṃ arthebhyo ‘kṣadhiyāṁ hi yaḥ |
anibaddáhasya bandhasya tadantaḥ kila kīlanam || 92 ||
cittasya viṣaye kvāpi bandhanaṁ dhāraṇātmakam |
tatsadr̥gjñānasaṁṅtāno dhyānam astamitāparam || 93 ||
yadā tu jñeyatādātmyam eva saṁvidi jāyate |
grāhyagrahaṇatādvaitaśūnyateyaṁ samāhitiḥ || 94 |
The withdrawal (pratyāhāra) of the senses and mind from their
objects consists of (nothing more than just) inwardly fixing (kīlana) (within
the mind) the bond (of contracted, conditioned consciousness), which is not
(yet) firmly secured (in outer objectivity, and so in actual fact serves only to

tighten it further). Fixation (dhāraṇā) consists of fixing the mind on some
object (viṣaya). Meditation (dhyāna) consists of a homogeneous flow of
cognitions (jñūāna), and is the cessation of (all that is) other than that

(astamitāparam). Contemplative absorption (samāhiti, i.e. samādhi) is

?” Here it seems that Jayaratha is saying is that the Vrāvalitantra only refers to

prāṇāyama as useless. Thus, it appears that the application to the other ancillaries of
Yoga of the same line of reasoning is Abhinava’s own extended exegesis of that. If so,
the verses that follow are written by Abhinava and not drawn from this source.

”” Clearly the topic of the two chapters of the Vīrāvalitantra to which Jayaratha refers
was Śiva and how He is essentially pure consciousness. If the Tantra was nondualist,
and so Śiva is all things, it follows that practice is useless. Liberation is attained only by

Śiva’s grace. Again, Abhinava quotes the Vīrāvalitantra as an authority for the view

that impurity is not ultimately real. This teaching is also justified by the same doctrine.
If everything is Śiva, nothing else apart from him exists that can contaminate him.
Moreover everything, being such, is pure, as is Śiva; nothing can be impure.
Read dhyānam astamitāparam for dhyānam astamitā param.

TANTRĀLOKA

the (experience of the) absence (śūnyatā) of duality between the object and
perception, when a state of oneness with the object arises within
consciousness. (92-94)

" The term here is samāhiti, which in a literal non-technical sense means ‘well placed

or deposited, performed, done, effected or completed’ and ‘close attention’. In the
context of yogic practice, it is a synonym of the term ‘samādhi’,which literally means

‘well gathered together’. The latter, much better-known term, denotes the final, most
developed, stage of concentration, that I call ‘contemplative absorption’ here. The series

of levels, as I translate them are, 1) pratyāhāra- withdrawal (of the senses), 2) dhāraṇa
— concentration, 3) dhyāna -— meditation, 4) samāhiti (samādhi) — contemplative
absorption.

The Yoga of the Yogasūtra is based on the philosophy of the Sāṁkhya, which

is dualist. It teaches that there are two realities. One is Nature — Prakṛti. This comprises

all that is in the sphere of objectivity, ranging from the gross outer object to the mind.
The other is consciousness, which is the nature of the individual soul. There are

countless individual souls, although there is only one Prakṛti, that varies for each one of

them. According to the praxis taught in the Yogasūtra, Yoga is the process of stilling the
mind by progressively withdrawing attention from the sphere of objectivity (i.e. Prakṛti),

to which the mind’s activity invariably relates. It is done by the practice of
concentration on progressively more subtle objects, ranging from a gross outer physical

object to the subtle sense of ego (asmitā), which has a bare trace of objectivity. The goal
is to isolate or rediscover the essential isolation (kaivalya) of the individual soul’s pure

free consciousness from Nature, which is insentient, binding and painful objectivity.
The liberated state is accordingly understood to be achieved by first discriminating the

two domains (viveka), then discerning that the objective domain is painful and that it
continues to affect the subjective domain as long as there is attachment to it. This

attachment is maintained by paying attention to the sphere of objectivity, which with its
diversity and incessant state of change, continues to generate fluctuations in the mind

that perceives it and is itself part of it. This discriminative insight leads to dispassion

(vairāgya), which develops hand in hand with the practice of concentration and
detachment. When detachment is total, the yogi attains the final stage of contemplation,

which is pure consciousness totally free of objectivity and the suffering, decay and death

it entails.

This, the Yogasūtra declares, is liberation. However, from the Kashmiri Śaiva
point of view, this is only the state of the Dissolution Deconditioned (pralayākala)

perceiver who, as we have seen (above, note 1,658), is in a state of deep sleep. This can
be ‘with some object’ (savedya) if there is an experience of bliss, or devoid of externally
perceived objectivity (apavedya). As this state cannot develop further by the practice

taught in the Yogasūtras and, moreover, is transitory, Abhinava rejects this also as not
being of any use for the attainment of full realisation. According to him, the ‘emptiness’

of the subject is due to the merger of objectivity into individual (not universal,

unconditioned) subjectivity. The Sāṁkhya, as we have just noted, considers that
emptiness to be due to the absence of objectivity. Thus, as in all the other ancillaries of

this Yoga, despite the claim that it progressively frees consciousness from objectivity, in
actual fact, Abhinava argues that at every step objectivity becomes more insidiously
entrenched. All that this praxis actually does is to internalize objectivity progressively
more, to the point where it becomes one with individual conditioned consciousness. It is
not absorbed thereby; rather it becomes so intimately bound to it, as happens in deep
sleep, that it cannot be directly extricated from it.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

Withdrawal (pratyāhāra) ‘consists of fixing inwardly’ the sensory

perceptions of the sense of vision etc. that have been withdrawn ‘from their

objectsʼ, form and the rest, so that, making (them) conform to the nature of the

(tranquil) mind (citta), they are brought under one’s own control. As is said (in
the Yogasūtra):

‘The withdrawal (pratyāhāra) of the senses (takes place) when, not
applied to their corresponding objects, they conform, as it were, the nature of

the mind (citta).’

And that is the (inner) ‘fixing’ which is the consolidation ‘of the bond
(of contracted consciousness conditioned by time and space etc.), which is
not (yet) firmly secured (in outer objectivity)ʼ, that is, has not developed.
(This condition) accords with the principle that: “in reality there is no world of
transmigration, (s0) how can there be any question of embodied beings being

bound? (We define) bondage as ‘the state of limitation (avacchinatva)
brought by space (and time) etc. of supreme consciousness which, out of its own

freedom, has assumed a contracted (state).” (Bondage is merely) strengthened

here by placing the senses that have been withdrawn here from somewhere to
somewhere (else). So how can the withdrawal (of the senses from their objects)

and the rest (of the states of internalization) be of (any) use to attaining a direct
(experience)

of

consciousness?

The

point

is,

how

can

(all-)pervasive

consciousness be experienced in (just) some (particular place, even an internal

one)?


As is said:

‘Fix your mind there, wherever it may wander to. As everything is Śiva,

once it moves, where will you go?

YSū. 2/54. The commentary on the Yogasūtra attributed to Vyāsa explains that: ‘Not
applied to their corresponding objects, the senses conform, as it were, to the nature of
the mind when it ceases to function, and (so) they also cease to function. Thus, the
application of (any) other means to control the senses is unnecessary. Just as drones

follow the course of the queen bee and rest (when she) rests, in the same way, when the

mind stops, the senses also stop their activities. This is (what is meant by) the

withdrawal (of the senses) (pratyāhāra).’ See Āraṇya (1977: 275).
Aṇuttarāṣṭaka 2a. The verse is quoted in full above in TĀv ad 1/332 (331). 2c is
quoted below ad 5/74cd-75ab (74) and ad 19/51-53ab (51cd-53). The point is that the

yogi withdraws his attention from the outer activity of the senses directed at their
objects because he realises that the world of fettered transmigratory existence is

insubstantial.
The withdrawal of the senses from their objects (pratyāhāra) does not lead to
liberation because withdrawing the senses from one locus entails intensifying their

activity in another one. Moreover, the withdrawal of the senses from their objects

caṉnot be a means to make pure consciousness directly perceptible, because
consciousness is all-pervasive, whereas this withdrawal implies only a localized

awareness. There is anyway no place outside consciousness to withdraw into.


The Sanskrit reads:


yatra yatra mano yāti tatra tatraiva dhārayet |

calitvā kutra gantāsi sarvaṁ sivamayaṁ yataḥ l

TANTRĀLOKA

SVT 4/313 is practically the same. That reads:
yatra yatra mano yāti jñeyaṁ tatraiva cintayet |

calitvā yāṣyate kutra sarvaṁ śivamayan yataḥ |
‘(For such a great yogi,) wherever (his) mind goes, he would think of (the
supreme reality) which is to be known. As everything is Śiva (sśivamaya), having moved
(from one place), where will it go?
There in the second line, instead of the reading calitvā kutra gantāsi, we find
calitvā yāsyate kutra, which means the same. This is the reading of this quote in MM p.
163 and VBh p. 64, and when the second line is quoted again below in TĀv ad 5/53cd-

54ab.


The entire passage in the SŚvacchandatantra says:

‘One whose mental disposition (bhāva) is firm (and unwavering), full (without

craving) all around (in all aspects) and made of (the supreme reality) which is to be

known, his mind, (although) he is in all the states (of consciousness), does not move.

(For such a great yogi,) wherever (his) mind goes, he thinks of (the supreme reality)

which is to be known. As everything is Śiva (sśivamaya), having moved (from one place)
where will it go? Present in all the fields (of consciousness) (viṣaya) and objects of the

senses, wherever one pays attention, there is no place where Śiva is absent. SvT 4/312-

SVT 4/314 is quoted above in TĀv ad 1/87-88
Kṣemarāja observes: “Having known this kind of oneness, he is never deluded.

The intended sense of the word ‘neverʼ is that (only) false yogis are deluded when they

rise out (of meditation).”
The second half of the verse quoted by Jayaratha that we are examining is
quoted by Śivopādhyāya in his commentary on VBh 74 (73) as if it were part of a verse
of the VBh. The texts of the manuscripts of the VBh are surprisingly varied, so it is not

impossible that this verse was indeed part of the VB. But even if it is not, exactly the

same idea is expressed in VBh 116 (cf. ibid. 117, 129), with which Śivopādhyāya links

it:

yatra yatra mano yāti bāhye vābhyantare ‘pi vā |

tatra tatra śivāvasthā vyāpakatvāt kva yāsyati || 116 ||
_Wherever the mind goes, whether outside or within, Śiva’s state is present
there. (Siva) pervades (everything), so where (else) could it go?’

Śivopādhyāya quotes the following in his commentary on VBh 116:
dehābhimāne galite vijñāte paramātmani |
yatra yatra mano yāti tatra tatra samādhayaḥ ||

‘Once the identification with the body has ceased and the Supreme Self has
been known, wherever the mind goes, there (the yogi experiences) the absorptions
(samādhi).’

Śiva’s presence everywhere justifies an important, indeed, central approach to

nondualist Kaula practice, which we find applied in several meditations taught in the

Vijñānabhairava. One of them, which is relevant here, is the realisation of Deity


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


The same contingency (avasā) applies to fixation (dhāraṇā) and the

rest. There (in that case, concentration consists of) fixing the mind on a
particular place, such as the Root (centre at the base of the spine) (kanda). As is
said (in the Yogasūtra):
‘Fixation (dhāraṇā) is fixing the mind (citta) on a (particular) place.

through the activity of the senses. However, this Trika Tantra nowhere identifies itself
as Kaula, although much of what it teaches could be said to be. This is perhaps because
Kaulism had not yet developed as an independent typology, or at least had not yet
asserted itself in Trika Śaivism. If this is correct, it could be taken as possible evidence
of an early date. Be that as it may, several meditations taught in the Vijñānabhairava

based on the view of Śiva’s omṇipresence understand that to mean that attention may be

fixed anywhere to experience Śiva’s presence through an expansion of consciousness
which empties it out of objective content, absorbing it into the emptiness (i.e. absence of
objectivity) of the unfolding subjectivity, within which the mind and senses come to

rest.

yatra yatrākṣamārgeṇa caitanyaṁ vyajyate vibhoḥ |
tasya taamātradharmitvāc cillayād bharitātmatā || 1 17 ||
‘Wherever the (universal) consciousness of the all-pervading Lord is revealed

through the path of the senses, (their object) dissolves away within consciousness,

because it possesses that (very) same nature alone, and so (the Lord’s) state of (perfect)
plenitude (as all things manifests as the yogi’s true nature). (117)
This meditation leads to the manifestation of one’s own supreme Bhairava
nature as the universe. Accordingly, Kṣemarāja quotes this verse in his commentary on
ŚSū 3/8: ʻwaking is the second ray (of consciousness).” (jāgrad dvitīyakaraḥ) Bhāskara
explains: ‘the waking state is said to be the knowledge (born of sensory perception).

Observing the field of his (awareness), with it the lord of yogis should gather together
all things into a unity, and thus eliminating delusion, should remain well awake at all
times and free of duality. The ray (kara, of sensory awareness) is like a hand (kara),
because it has the power to gather together the waking state in this way, and so is said to
be the second (ray), because of its wonderful (cosmic) nature.' Kṣemarāja summarizes
this cognitive Yoga in a nutshell in his commentary: ‘The meaning is that ‘this universe
shines forth effulgent, as if it were the rays of his own (consciousness).’ (viśvam asya
svadīdhitikalpaṁ sphurati ity arthaḥ)
The reader may recall that Jayaratha has quoted (in TĀv ad 1/4) from an

unidentified source as saying: “The All-pervasive Lord (vibhu) Himself blossoms forth

wherever the rays (of the senses) unite (within consciousness when they make contact
with their objects).” If this takes place, the activity of the mind and senses need not be

quelled. Indeed, they can be used to propel the yogi who aspires to liberation to higher
states of expanded blissful consciousness. As Abhinava says below concerning the
experience of this yogi’s elevated cognitive Yoga: ‘Wherever (this) Wheel falls, by (its)

association with this process (whatever be the sense organ through which it operates), it
is indeed all things (and so all the other functions of consciousness following along with

it) like a great emperor, the lord of all the earth (who is followed into battle by his vassal

lords).” (TĀ 5/30cd-31ab). See below note 4,355.
YSū 3/1. Vyāsa explains: “concentration (dhāraṇā) consists of keeping or fixing the
mind on the navel circle, or on the lotus of the heart, or on the effulgent centre of the
head, or on the tip of the nose or on the tongue or on such like spots in the body, or on

any external object, by means of the modifications of mind. (Āraṇya (1977): 279)

TANTRĀLOKA

The nature (of things) (rūpa) (experienced) in meditation (dhyāna)

consists of a stream of perceptions of the same kind, not dissimilar ones, and so

is also conditioned by a (limited) fixed form.” As is said:

‘Meditation (dhyāna) is the (continuous), homogeneous flow of

cognition (pratyaya) there (in that state of concentration).

Thus it is said that it is ‘the cessation of (all that is) other than

that’ The nature (of things) (rūpa) (experienced) in contemplative absorption

(samādhi) is also the manifestation of the object of knowledge alone
(jñeyamātra), which is the object of meditation, by the removal of the two

forms, namely, knowledge and the object of knowledge. Here (in this case also),

(its particular) fixed form limits (and conditions consciousness). As is said (in
the Yogasūtra):
‘Contemplative absorption (samādhi) is (the experience of) the
manifestation of just the bare entity (arthamātra) (which is the object of

meditation), as if it were devoid ofa nature of its own.

Surely (one may ask,) the (first) five, that is, the prohibitions (yama)

and the rest, are external ancillaries (of Yoga),” so if they have no application

to consciousness, let that be. (But according to the following Yogasūtra, which
says that): “(these) three are internal (practices) with respect to the previous

ones, how is it that these are not applicable there (to the realisation of the
liberated state of pure) consciousness? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Dhyāna is a flow of homogenous cognitions. It cannot encompass those that are
heterogeneous. So it is also of no use to realizing pure consciousn
which is allinclusive.

Ṁ YSū 3/2. Vyāsa comments: “There, in that place (mentioned in the commentary on
the previous sūtra), the flow of the cognitive consciousness relating to the object of
meditation being continuous, i.e. uninterrupted by any other cognition or thought, is
known as ‘meditation’ (dhyāna).”

Ṛead astamitāparam for astamitā param.
Read <śūnyam iva for śūnvam iva YSū 3/3. Vyāsa explains that: “when the state of
meditation (dhyāna) becomes so deep that only the object stands by itself, obliterating,
aṣ it were, all traces of reflective thought, it is known as ‘contemplative absorption’

(samādhi). The Sāṁkhya view is dualistic. There are two realities, namely, the
perceiver (that is, puruṣa, jīva) and the sphere of objectivity (prakṛti). Both are eternal.

Thus, the object in the full state of contemplation does not cease to exist nor is it

absorbed into the perceiver; it is simply removed from the purview of the perceiver, or
better, the perceiver retreats far away enough from it that it no longer impinges on

consciousness, and so, unmanifest, it is ‘as if it were devoid of a nature of its ownʼ, that
is, non-existent.”
The five external ancillaries of Yoga are prohibitions (yama), injunction (niyama),

posture (āsana), breath control (prāṇāyāma) and withdrawal (pratyāhāra).
YSū 3/7. Vyāsa explains: ‘these three, namely, concentration, meditation and
contemplation, are more internal than (the observance of) prohibitions (yama) and
injunctions (niyama) with respect to (the practice of) Yoga with perception

(saṁprajñāta).


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Ṭ̄TI JTTTTATTĪTHĒTTTĀĪ TTT |

tad eṣā dhāraṇādhyānasamādhitritayī parām |
saṁvidaṁ prati no kañcid upayogaṁ samaśnute || 95 ||
(Thus,) these three (ancillaries of Yoga), namely, fixation,
meditation and contemplative absorption, are of no use at all in attaining
supreme consciousness.

In accord with (what was) said (before, namely) “(The withdrawal

(pratyāhāra) of the senses and mind from their objects consists of (nothing
more than just)) inwardly fixing (kīlana) (within the mind) the bond (of
contracted, conditioned consciousness), which is not (yet) firmly secured (in

outer objectivity, and so in actual fact serves only to tighten it further)’ and

the rest, (these ancillaries of Yoga are also of no use) because they are (in

reality) binding.
Surely (one may ask,) if that is the case, why are the prohibitions
(yama) and the rest of the eight called ancillaries of Yoga? With this doubt in
mind, he says:
Sound Discriminative Reasoning - the Sole Ancillary of Yoga

TṬTITTT: I Rē I

yogāṅgatā yamādes tu samādhyantasya varṇyate |
svapūrvapūrvopāyatvād antyatarkopayogataḥ || 96 ||
If the (eight) beginning with the prohibitions and ending with
contemplative absorption are (rightly) described (at all) as being the
ancillaries of Yoga, it is because each one is the means to that which follows
after it, and so they serve in the end (to attain sound) discriminative

reasoning (by which one’s own consciousness is realised directly).

Above, 4/92cd. I have added the first line in brackets to complete the sense.
Abhinava is very careful to underscore that the teaching is not that the practice of
Yoga, or indeed, any spiritual discipline, is useless, and so all that needs to be done is to
do nothing. The ancillaries of Yoga do not, and cannot, purify consciousness, which is,

always was, and always will be pure, and hence immortal and free. The practice of the
ancillaries of Yoga is useful — indeed for the great majority of people, essential — for
various reasons, which Abhinava gives in this and the following verses. Essentially

these are 1) the ancillaries lead to one another and ultimately culminate in Pure
Knowledge. 2) Although exercising the psychophysical organism does not develop

consciousness, consciousness can develop and transform the psychophysical organism.
3) As everything is essentially consciousness, practice removes the ignorance and other
factors which obscures our understanding that this is so. 4) The reflective awareness
(vimarśa) of consciousness can be strengthened by practice. Basically, Abhinava is

TANTRĀLOKA

It is right (to say) that (sound discriminative reasoning is a) fit (means

to realisation) ‘in the endʼ, as it is the object of attainment of the eight
ancillaries (of Yoga), beginning with the prohibitions (yama). The prohibitions
are the means to the injunctions (niyama), the injunctions to posture (āsana) and
so on, in due order. (Thus,) the eight beginning with the prohibitions are
described as ancillaries (of Yoga) insofar as the previous ones (in the series)
serve as a means to the subsequent ones. Now, as they are objects of attainment
(in this way with respect to one another), related to each other in a series, such
that one leads to the next, they can be of use (to developing sound)

discriminative reasoning, which comes at the very end (of the series). It is

because of this that the self-reflective awareness of the yogi, whose insight
(mati) has also been prepared (and aided) (upaskta) by these eight (ancillaries),
arises in this way, by virtue of which (he experiences) his own (pure)
consciousness directly in a moment. The point of setting aside the six ancillaries
of Yoga of our own system (darśana) and referring here (instead to) the eight

(ancillaries) of Patañjali’s (Yoga) is because there is no other limb (of Yoga)
apart from these eight ancillaries, and so in all cases (all) other (possible)
ancillaries (of Yoga) are the means to (sound) discriminative reasoning, which

is (by itself the means to) the direct experience of one’s own (innate pure)
consciousness.
He (now gives reasons to) establish this (view).

arazq aTat: | <.I
antaḥ saṁvidi rūḍhaṁ hi taddvārā prāṇadehayoḥ |

buddhau vārpyaṁ tadabhyāsān naiṣa nyāyas tu saṁvidi || 97 ||

Indeed, that which is inwardly established in consciousness can be

transmitted through it by practice to the breath, body or intellect. It is not

logically possible (that it should be the other way round, that is, from the
body etc.) to consciousness.”

teaching that the practice of the ancillaries of Yoga can only aid the development of a

higher, more expanded state of consciousness by exercising self-awareness. This is what
spiritual development is, and is itself the means to it. We may engage in āsana practice
or aerobics, for example, or even meditation on a Mantra, prayer, the vital breath, or just
tranquil stillness; none of that helps our spiritual development unless it strengthens the

awareness of universal and transcendental divine consciousness, and that awareness

develops to the degree that thoughts are purified and wane away through Sound

Reasoning, which is Pure Knowledge.

But see above, note to 4/15-16, concerning whether Abhinava does really refer to a
six-limbed Yoga or not.

See below, 5/14cd-16ab and MVV 2/5. The body, senses, mind, and so too the vital
breath function because consciousness is present within them. All the limbs of Yoga,
and indeed any other presumed means of realisation based on them, reside in this way

within consciousness, as it does within them, and so cannot serve as a means to attaining
it. Swami Lakṣhmanjoo explains: “God Consciousness is the life of all these means.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


As that which is ‘inwardly established in consciousness’, at one with
it, has developed and is perceived, the prohibitions and the rest (develop)
‘through it’, by means of consciousness itself, (as) nothing which is not
perceived can be applied to any practical purpose (vyavahārayogya). This is the
point. (Consciousness) ‘can be transmitted by practice’ to the body and the
rest by attending (to consciousness) repeatedly. The meaning is that
(consciousness) develops (there) in accord with its capacity to slowly (and
gradually) purify (them), that is, (by means of the practice of) the postures etc.
with respect to the body, breath control with respect to the vital breath, and

withdrawal (of the senses) with respect to the intellect. ‘It is not logicalʼ that,

on the contrary, by the power of the practice of the prohibitions etc. and their
development in the body etc., it gives rise to development within consciousness.
It is said that the capacity (to observe and practice the) prohibitions etc. that
develops within consciousness is (essentially a process of) purification
(saṁsṣkāra), and consciousness does not require purification. Purification (is the

process of attaining a more) excellent (state), and that is not possible within
(consciousness, as it is the most excellent state possible, otherwise, if it were in

need of purification,) the contingency would arise that it is not consciousness
(because purification is a process whereby that which is purified is made one

with consciousness, which is essentially pure).” Thus the prohibitions and the
rest (of the ancillaries of Yoga) serve no purpose with regards to this eternally

manifest and supreme nondual (consciousness). This is the overall sense (of

what is taught here). As is said:

‘(If one were to ask,) how could that which is firmly fixed (nirūḍha)

within consciousness in all respects (abhitaḥ) be transmitted to the vital breath,

intellect and body, so that the sequence of means (to realisation) operates there
(within them)? We wonder (on the contrary,) what, where or how could those

who exert themselves by the path of practice to purify this consciousness

contribute (anything to it) here?”

Or else (one can accept that this mounting) excellence, which is (the

developing)

manifestation

(of consciousness),

does

take place

consciousness (directly), by means of the body and the rest. He says this:

within

EÉPĀEEEKṀIEIGECŪTĀEzTYAḤI

TSĪTĀTTTTTIĪSāYTĀTĪIS-TĪTTḤ
I Q¢ I
atha vāsmaddrśi prāṇadhīdehāder api sphuṭam |
sarvātmakatvãt tatrastho ʻpy abhyãso ʻnyavyapohanam || 98 I

They exist in God, so how can they be the means to God? One enters God

Consciousness only by Tarka [sound reasoning]. (personal communication)

AIl extermal yogic discipline is based on the accumulation of latent impressions, but

these being finite cannot affect consciousness in any way. Self-awareness is the only
means, and this is the awareness consciousness has of itself.

TANTRĀLOKA

Or else (if you prefer to put it another way), because, according to
our view, the vital breath, intellect and body etc. are (each) of the nature of
all things, practice based on them clearly leads to the elimination of the
contrary (elements which prevent the manifestation of consciousness).


Or else, according to the view of the philosophy of supreme nonduality
(parādvayavāda), that ‘although the Absolute (Brahman) is (equally in each)

place, (It is) omniform, unsurpassed and inconceivable’, the body and the rest

are also essentially consciousness, and so ‘are of the nature of all thingsʼ.
Thus, the practice of the prohibitions etc., although established (only) there in
the vital breath and the rest, (corresponds implicitly) to the denial of other

(modes of conduct) that are not those of the prohibitions and the other

(ancillaries of Yoga), which are established in duality, such as violence and the

like. In this way, just as one should not do violence to oneself, so also (one

should not do s0) to others. Thus, consciousness itself manifests by the falling
away of duality between oneself and the other, because (both) manifest as one’s

own nature. This is the sense (of this verse).

Surely (one may ask,) if one practices that here, one should become
more skilled (in the development of higher states of consciousness) by the
strengthening of the latent impressions (formed thereby). (If that is what you
mean,) let that be (as you say). What is wrong with that? (However,) how is that
that (practice) exerts itself to eliminate something else in such a way that it may

AII things are essentially Śiva consciousness, and so everything is of the nature of

everything else. So from this point of view, as the body, senses, mind and vital breath
are also such, they can be said to serve as a means to developing Śiva consciousness. In
other words, the means and the goal are the same, and so they work together.

Consciousness is perpetually self-realised and revealed. Yogic and other spiritual

practices simply remove the veil of ignorance which seemingly obscures this fact. Thus,
Sound Reasoning operates in this way, in the Empowered Means, whereas the other

practices do so in the lower Individual Means described in the following chapter. But in
every case, they do so, paradoxically, because consciousness is already realised, and

there are no means outside it to attain it.

” See above, TĀv ad 1/165 and note there. This line is also quoted above in TĀv ad

3/43cd-45ab (45-46) and below in TĀv ad 12/5 and 28/375cd-376ab.

The practice of the ancillaries of Yoga are all related to the body, senses, mind, and

vital breath, which are conditioned, finite entities. Thus, they would not lead to
realisation, which is the manifestation of unconditioned consciousness, were it not that
the body and the rest are themselves forms of consciousness. Moreover, the practice of
the ancillaries of Yoga is beneficial and justified, because by practicing them, their

opposites, which are harmful, are eliminated. The practice of nonviolence, which is one

of the injunctions, eliminates violence done to oneself and others. The practice of
nonviolence facilitates the manifestation of consciousness, which is the realisation that it
is one's own consciousness, and that of others is the same. Violence done to others is

violence done to oneself. Conversely, good done to others is good done to oneself. The

more deeply we experience that, the more firmly we realise the fundamental oneness of

consciousness. To put it another way, to the degree in which we experience Śiva’s
immortal, blissful consciousness, to that degree we take on the suffering of others and
share in their joy.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


give rise to some other result also? In order to quell this doubt, he gives (the
following) example.

EtḷtkkEti|ssattteṭḷḷ

3c@ṝqd TgeaŪdTaTRIg7āŪēaTd I Q8 I
deha utplutisaṁpātadharmojjigamiṣārasāt |
utplāvyate tadvipakṣapātāśaṅkāvyapohanāt || 99 ||
(Thus,) the body is made to jump upward by the quality of the zeal
(rasa) of one’s intention to jump up (strengthened by repeated practice
and) much jumping, and by eliminating the fear that it will fall, in a
manner contrary to that (which is intended).

(The body) ‘jumps upwards’, that is, leaps upwards much, because it
takes place repeatedly in order to (develop thereby) the ‘quality’, which is the
desire to travel upwards, of the ‘zeal’ and excellence of (the athlete’s)

enthusiasm (to do so, that develops) by repeated practice. Eliminating first of all
the fear that the body will fall down or sideways, in a manner contrary to the
zeal of one’s intention to jump upwards, it is ‘made to jump upwardʼ, that is,
is rendered fit to jump (further) upwards by exerting the ancillaries etc. (to
improve their performance). This is the meaning. In that way, by practicing
jumping upwards, the body’s downward etc. fall is attenuated. Thus, by

practicing one thing, another is also achieved. This is the point.
He now relates this (example) to the main point.

TG-TTĒKHYTTÇ] TaTJTSĪ |
Jg, āgaīī sgaī: ũúaftrīa

Q00 1|

guruvākyaparāmarśasadṛśe svavimarśane |
prabuddhe tadvipakṣāṇāṁ vyudāsaḥ pāṭhacintane || 100 |I

!The question is, how can the elimination of latent traces of ignorance bring about

higher states of consciousness? How can practice to bring about one result (i.e. the
removal of latent traces) give rise to a different one (i.e. higher levels of consciousness),

especially as the nature of consciousness and the latent traces are quite different?

The athlete, through training and casting aside fear of falling, learns to jump higher

and higher. As he jumps higher, he is also attempting to fall less. Ideally a time will

come when he jumps, he will continue to move upward without ever falling. In the same

way, by repeatedly directing our intention to elevate our consciousness, it rises higher as
practice progresses by eliminating those factors which bring it down. As Swami

Lakshmanṇjoo puts it: ‘when you jump up you do so by rejecting ‘falling down’.

(personal communication) So, in the same way, by focusing on God you reject

differentiated perception.’

TANTRĀLOKA

Once (the disciple’s) own reflective awareness, which is similar to

that (aroused by) the teacher’s instruction, is awakened, (all things) that

are contrary to that (enlightened state of consciousness) are eliminated
when he ponders on the readings of the scripture (pāṭhacintana).

When, in this way, by the excellence of the disciple’s repeated practice
of pondering on the readings of the scripture etc., his ‘own reflective
awarenessʼ conforms ‘to that (aroused by) the teacher’s instructionʼ; the
dullness and the rest ‘that are contrary’ to his own (enlightened) reflective

awareness ‘are eliminatedʼ

Surely (one may ask,) if dullness and the rest (of the obstacles) can be
eliminated just by the power of the teacher°s instruction, then what is the use of

(the disciple’s) own reflective awareness, which (in that case would be)

like an

inner (useless) goitre (or hump on his back) (gadu)? With this doubt in mind,

he says:

fif̄ ārafaġ

JIĪ J=z Ta aṬ |

g.0. 1

nahy aṣya guruṇā śakyaṁ svaṁ jñānaṁ śabda eva vā |
dhiyi ropayituṁ tena svaprabodhakramo dhruvam || 101 |
Insofar as the teacher cannot inculcate his own knowledge or even
word into the intellect (of his disciple directly), there can be no doubt
(dhruvyam) that the (disciple ultimately brings about) the progressive
awakening (of his own consciousness) by himself.
The teacher cannot make his knowledge, that is, his ideas (cintā) etc., or
(even his) word, whether his own or one he reads (from the scripture), develop

in his disciple’s intellect, by his own power alone, as long as (the disciple) does

not possess his own reflective awareness. This is because he is not capable of

even understanding the teacher’s instruction (vākya) without his own reflective

awareness, so how is it even possible for (the obstacles to his understanding,)

Notice that, stated in this way, Abhinava does not preclude that the teacher be absent;

indeed, no longer alive. In No Means, Abhinava stresses the presence of the Master. He
need not teach anything. For the disciple who is ready, a gracious glance is sufficient to
liberate him. Here, at the level of the Empowered Means, it is the teaching which
counts.
The disciple ponders repeatedly on the scripture he reads, keeping his thoughts in

harmony with those of his teacher, and so when the self-reflective awareness of

Siva’s

pure, unlimited consciousness, which is the essential purport of the scripture and

the

teacher’s instructions, arises within him, all the notions he has that are contrary
to it and
prevent its manifestation, are eliminated.

These are the two relevant meanings of the word ‘gaḍu’ in this context. A hump on

one's back or a goitre are both unnecessary accretions to the body. They only deform
it,
without serving any function. If the teacher’s instruction were to suffice
by itself to

enlighten the disciple, his reflective awareness would be similarly superfluous.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


such as (his) dullness, to come to an end? Therefore, it is certain that there is a
progressive (development) of his own (awakened) consciousness (bodha),
which is his own reflective awareness, excellent because it is Pure

Knowledge.® This is the rest (that is implied to complete the meaning of what

is stated here).
By the glorious power of those who are attentive by nature (to the
teachings and practice of Śiva consciousness), even something experienced in a
dream becomes directly perceptible (to them in all respects), right up to (the

performance) of its function (arthakriyā).” Accordingly, he says:

Tā td TaSIṀ JT T-ITT āTTT |

TṬarc-āTTTTTAIIT TWTA T WŪAT || Q0 |I

ata eva svapnakāle śrute tatrāpi vastuni |
tādātmyabhāvanāyogo na phalāya na bhaṇyate || 102 ||

Thus it is said that even if applied to something heard in a dream,

the Yoga of the Creative Contemplation of Oneness (tādātmyabhāvanāyoga)
certainly bears fruit.

‘Thus it is said that’ just by being aware of oneself, even when one

perceives something unreal, such as something heard in a dream, or (one sees)

the form of a woman or the like (as happens with nocturnal emissions), by

repeatedly practicing the Yoga of Creative Contemplation (bhāvanāyoga), it
‘certainly bears fruit’. The meaning is that one experiences it directly as

functioning (as does something experienced) when awake.

Although the teacher may instruct, if the disciple is devoid of reflective awareness,
he can never come to understand it. Thus, from this point of view, his progressively
developing insight, which is essentially Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyā), is superior even

to the teacher’s instructions.

Real and illusory objects are distinguished from one another because the former do

not give rise to the effects of the latter. A rope lying on the floor ofa dark room that is
mistaken for a snake cannot bite. It does not ‘perform the function’ (arthakriyā) of a

snake.
The Yoga of the Contemplation of Oneness (tādātmyabhāvanāyoga) is the union

(yoga) with Śiva consciousness that develops by contemplating one’s own essential

oneness with it. It is the contemplative process of becoming one, which develops by the
exercise of reflective awareness in all states of consciousness, including dreaming. Even
dream objects, that are unreal, take on the reality of objects perceived in the waking
state by recognising that both are equally manifestations of consciousness. This happens

by first cultivating the reflective awareness of being conscious as the individual
perceiver; then, as that reflective awareness strengthens, by cultivating the awareness of
being the universal perceiver, who is consciousness itself. We know this is possible

because even without developing higher forms of reflective awareness we sometimes

experience dream objects as being so real that they give rise to the same results as their
externally real counterparts. The standard example is emission when a man sees a
beautiful woman in a dream. Here the term bhāvanā translated here as ‘contemplation’
retains its literal sense, which is ‘bringing into being’. Bhāvanāyoga — the Yoga of

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask,) if the subject (viṣaya) (of these teachings) is

considered to be one’s own self-awareness, then what is the nature of the

recitation (pāṭha) (of scripture) and the pondering (on its meaning) (cintā)?

TgTHT=. TaTSTTIĪT TS: |

Ṭarax ṁazṛ ftrrā dtxrzaaāṁq
| 1031
saṅketānādare śabdaniṣṭham āmarśanaṁ pāṭhaḥ |
tadādare tadarthasthā cinteti paricarcyatām || 103 I|
The recitation (of passages from the scriptures is defined as a form
of) reflective awareness (āmarśana) focused on (just) the sound (of the
words), without regard for the convention (that ascribes meaning to them).
When one does pay attention to (the convention,) consider that to be

(contemplative) thought (cintā) focused on their meaning.

Contemplation, is thus also the Yoga of Bringing into Being. Śiva ‘brings things into
beingʼ by the creative freedom which is His reflective awareness. The same reflective

awareness animates every limited ‘contracted’ locus of consciousness. Thus, the
exercise of reflective awareness amounts to the exercise of the freedom of
consciousness to do all things and bring them about. Thus, ‘contemplation’— bhāvanā —
is a process of self-suggestion attained through the practice of concentration and the

like, which when it reaches its supreme level, causes the objects which the yogi
contemplates, whether real or unreal, to appear to him as if immediately in front of him,
fully evident. The Buddhist Dharmakīrti (PV 2/285) is quoted by Abhinava (IPVv, 1 p.
270) and Kṣemarāja (SpN p. 27) as saying in this regard: ‘Thus all that is meditatively

realised, whether real or unreal, with great intensity appears clearly before the yogi, at
the culmination of the process, fulfilling his desires.”

The expression ‘Yoga of Contemplation’ (bhāvanāyoga) is equivalent to the

expression ‘process of contemplation’ (bhāvanākrama), that we find in the following

passage in Abhinava’s Tantrasāra: ʻWhen, in order to enter into the essential nature (of
consciousness) explained before, one purifies thought progressively (krameṇa), one
must apply the process of contemplation (bhāvanākrama), preceded by the teaching of a

true teacher, true scripture and sound reasoning. Due to the power of thought
(vikalpabala), people believe themselves to be bound. This (mistaken) belief (which is
due to their thought constructs) is the cause of the continuing state of transmigration.

Thus (it is not illogical to maintain that) the arising of a thought construct which is

contrary to that destroys the thought construct which is the cause of transmigratory
existence, and so (serves) as the cause of the elevation (of the fettered soul). And that

(thought construct) which is such transcends all (the principles) up to Śiva, which are
limited (and conditioned), and is the ultimate reality (paramārtha), which is nothing but
unconditioned consciousness. It is the place where (all) things are deployed (according

to their own nature), which is (their) radiant (vital) energy (tejas) that gives life to

everything. That is itself myself (aham), and so it is that I (aham) transcend all things
and am the nature of all things. This (realisation) does not arise for those who are
blinded by Māyā, because (they are) devoid of Sound Reasoning and the rest.’ TSā p.
21-22

Śee above, 4/100.

Read with MSs K and C tadarthasthā for tadarthastu.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


(If one recites scripture without regard for) the ‘convention’, that is,
one is indifferent to the meaning (of the words) established by linguistic
convention, one is said to be ‘focused on the sound (of the words)’
(śabdaniṣṭha), and not on (their) meaning (arthaniṣṭha). When one does pay
aṭṭention to that, with relation to the sound (of the words), the perception of
(their) meaning (arises) by giving it precedence over the perception of (just) the

sound (of the words). This is the sense (of this verse).

Having thus explained this by the way, he (now) continues (his
exposition of) the main point.

hdv£TTṀ-ĀYIITTĀGHT
3: I| g |
! The word śabda has two meanings. One is ‘word’ and the other ‘sound’, which

indicate two ways of understanding language. A language consists of sounds. They are
the sounds of the words not, of course, just any sounds. In the case of Sanskrit (as well

as other languages like Hebrew or Arabic), the sound of the language is an integral
feature of the language which, at least from the perspective of its use in ritual, is as

important as the capacity these sounds have to convey meaning. The recitation of the
Vedas or Tantric Mantras is an example of how Sanskrit functions as a language even
without reference to its meaning. Vedic or Tantric Mantras may have meaning, but a

knowledge of that is not essential, all that is required is their utterance for ritual or yogic
purposes. The Vedas are still nowadays meticulously committed to memory, which

takes years of hard work, without any felt need to understand their meaning. This is
because the purpose of doing so is just their recitation. The sound itself is considered to

be powerful and sacred in itself. Abhinava explains that the reason for this is because by

reciting or hearing it, the reflective awareness of consciousness, free of thought
constructs, is strengthened. Thus, Jayaratha’s commentary ignores an important point
that Abhinava is making here with regards to the distinction between the two aspects of

the practice of reading or reciting scriptures. One is the exercise of nondiscursive,
reflective awareness devoid of notions, by focusing on just the sound of the Sanskrit of
the recitation. The other is the contemplation of the notions which form by reflecting on
its meaning. Thīs process is called cintā, which means literally, as I have translated,
‘(contemplative) thought’. Here this term refers to the progressive refining of thought to
higher notions of the meaning of the scripture, culmiṇating in
i the intuitive insight of its

ultimate purport, whichis the experience that one’s own essential Śiva nature and all
things are one with it. This is Pare Knowledge and the acme of Sound Reasoning. These
two ways of reading scripture, that is, concentrating on its sound alone or its meaning,
reinforce each other and lead to the same state of consciousness, although the former is

nonconceptual, and the latter involves thought.

According to Swami Lakshmanjoo (2007: 39), the state of concentration on the

sound of language is dhyāna. Cintā is a more subtle state of concentration on the onepointed concentration of dhyāna. Iṭ is practiced to maintain that concentration. In this

perspective, knowledge of the meaning of language, and attention to it, is considered to
be superior to just utterance without that knowledge. This is consistent with

Abhinavagupta’s view that any aspect or form of ritual, like the recitation of Mantras,

should be accompanied by a deepening understanding of their sense that is attained in a
heightened state of consciousness that develops by the Yoga of Sound. This must be so
if ritual or the recitation of a sacred text is to develop into the knowledge which, when it
attains fullness, is itself the liberated state. See below, 5/136cd-137ab (5/135cd-136ab)

and cross references noted there.

TANTRĀLOKA

tadadvayāyāṁ saṁvittāv abhyāso ʻnupayogavān |
kevalaṁ dvaitamālinyaśaṅkānirmūlanāya saḥ || 104 ||
1\s far as that nondual consciousness is concerned, (repeated)
practice (abhyāsa) is useless (as it always perfect). (Practice) serves only to

uproot the doubt that (consciousness is in any way) sullied by duality.

For the aforestated reason, (as far as) ‘that’ (nondual consciousness is

concerned), ‘(repeated) practice’ of (the ancillaries of Yoga,) beginning with

the prohibitions, (is useless). Well then, if this (practice) serves no purpose, then
why is it mentioned (at all)? With this doubt in mind, he says: “(Practice)

serves onlyʼ etc.

Surely (one may ask,) if that is the case, why was it said before that

sound discriminative reasoning, which is essentially one’s own reflective

awareness, uproots (all) the doubts (which are the thought constructs due to the

mistaken notion) of duality (dvaitasaṅkā)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

dvaitaśaṅkāś ca tarkeṇa tarkyanta iti varṇitam |
tattarkasādhanāyās tu yamāder apy upāyatā || 105 ||
It was said that discriminative reasoning investigates the doubts
(which are the thought constructs) brought about by (the mistaken notion

of) duality, (and so eliminates them). The prohibitions and the rest (of the

Veṛse 104 continues on from verse 100.
The expression nirmūlanāya literally means ‘in order to render (the mistaken notion

of duality) without rootsʼ. The common daily experience of the fettered soul is that there

is a difference between himself as the perceiver and the world around him. He

experiences this duality because he is ignorant that the true nature of all things,
including himself, is the one consciousness which manifests as every single thing, that

is, both as the perceivers and their objects as well as their perceptions of them. These
distinctions are essentially thought constructs (vikalpa). If examined in the light of the

teaching concerning the oneness, i.e. the absence of duality, in the one reality of

consciousness, these notions are no longer taken for granted as being true and correct.

However, they persist as doubts which, as active expressions of ignorance, seem to sully

the purity of self-illumining consciousness. The insight of Sound Reasoning, namely,

the Pure Knowledge which is the experience that ‘I am all this (universe) and all this
(universe) is me’ severs the very root of these doubts. Realising them to be groundless,
they give way to the clarity of insight which is the reflective awareness of consciousness
itself.

Only Sound Reasoning is a direct means to realization. The other means function on
its basis and serve only to clear away impediments to its application, progress, and the
attainment of its goal.

! One could also translate the expression dvaitasaikā as ‘the doubt born of duality’ or
‘the doubt which is duality°.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


ancillaries of Yoga) serve as means (to realisation indirectly only) insofar as
they are means to that discriminative reasoning.
‘It was said’, when the nature of intuitive reason was discussed.

Moreover, it is said:

‘By means of that (sound discriminative reasoning), the Yogi may
discern that which impels towards the accomplishment of Yoga
(yogasiddhipravartaka) and that which obstructs it, which is established (and

ordered) (saṁvyavasthita) in many ways.”

Therefore, it was said that the prohibitions and the rest (of the

ancillaries of yoga) uproot the doubt that (consciousness is in any way sullied)
by duality, because they are (progressively), one after another, means to the
sound reasoning (which brings) that (about). Therefore, (sound reasoning)

should be said to be the primary (factor) amongst them. Thus he says that (the
ancillaries of yoga are means to realisation) ‘insofar as they are means to that

discriminative reasoning’. Thus it is said that only (sound) intuitive reasoning
is the direct means (to the realization of enlightened) consciousness, not the
other (ancillaries).

Nor is this (teaching unsupported by the) authority (of the scriptures).


Thus, he says:


- sīgā |

fōr̄ēītēē adtrgṣhza JTT | g ē 1]

a 1

ITĪTTHĪRĀTRAĪTTT; R]: RĒTI
ĪT ; I| 2 09 |

uktaṁ śrpūrvaśāstre ca na dvaitaṁ nāpi cādvayam |

liṅgapūjādikaṁ sarvam ity upakramya śambhunā || 106 II

vihitaṁ sarvam evātra pratiṣiddham athāpi vā |
prãṇāyāmādikair aṅgair yogāḥ syuḥ kṛtrimā yataḥ l| 107 ||
te tenākṛtakasyāsya kalāṁ nārghanti ṣoḍaśīm |
Moreover,

Lord

Śiva

has

said

in

the

(the

Maālinīvijayottara), in the passage that begins: ‘there is neither duality nor

nonduality and no worship of the Liṅga or the like . .

(He goes on to

say that) ‘everything is prescribed here, or else (one could say that
everything is) prohibited.” (The point is that) ‘the Yogas (of other systems),

See above, 4/13 ff.

. Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha 20/31, quoted by Vasudeva (p. 422). Read with
Vasudeva nirodhakaṅ for nivartakam.

The three references in this passage drawn from the MV correspond to MV 18/74cd,
78ab and 19, respectively.

TANTRĀLOKA

along with the various ancillaries such as breath control, are artificial
(mental constructs) (kṛtrima). Thus, they are not worth (even) a sixteenth

part of this one, which is uncreated (and authentic) (akṛtrima).’ (106108ab)

Śambhu has said in the Śrīpūrvaśastra, (in the passage) which begins,
‘neither duality nor nonduality°, which is not quoted (with exactly the same

words) due to the constraints of the metre."” A negative particle is also

(implicitly) associated (with the statement), ‘anything such as the adoration of
the

liṅga

etc.”

(denoting

its

negation).

As

is

said

there

(in

the

Maālinīvijayatantra): ʻand (so too), not the worship of the liṅga etc.’." (The
word) ‘anythingʼ (implies) that (this Tantra) accepts that (everything,)
beginning with the worship of the Liṅga, should (also not) be given up etc. As is
said there:
‘(There is no worship of the Liṅga or the like), neither its
abandonment. There is neither (the renouncerʼs) rule of not carrying to own
anything (niṣparigrahatā) nor (the householder’s) engagement with possessions
(saparigrahatā). (Such practices as having) matted hair, (smearing the body)

with ashes and the like are neither rejected (nor enjoined). Such is also the

case with the observance or otherwise of (the ascetic’s) Vows and the like.
Entry into the sacred meeting grounds (kṣetra) etc., the observance of the Rule
etc., (the diṣṭinction between) one’s own and othersʼ (sectarian) appearance

(rūpa), sectarian insignia (liṅga), (initiatory) names and clans (gotra) or the like
— none are either prescribed or prohibited in this (Tantra).
(Well then, an opponent may object that) in this way, (all that one can
do) amounts to maintaining silence. With this doubt in mind, he says:

‘(everything is) prescribed’ etc. Everything (prescribed in the scriptures) is
enjoined, and (they are also) prohibited. Prohibiting something and (having
done so) enjoining something (else) would give rise (to the duality of) relative
distinctions (bheda). Thus, there is no division between what is to be done and

what not for a yogi who has realized the nonduality of consciousness. This is
what is being said (here). Thus ‘the yogas’ of other systems which, accepting
breath control and the like (to be the ancillaries of yoga as means to realization
MV 18/19. MV reads -iṅgair for aṅgair, -matāḥ for yataḥ. Read with the MV te
tena for tat tena. See above, note 4,2.
Ibid. 18/74c. In the printed edition of the MV, this line reads: na dvaitaṁ nāpi
cādvaitam. Abhinava’s reading of it is: na dvaitaṁ nāpi cādvayam. The meaning is the

same. Jayaratha quotes the first version to explain that Abhinava makes this change to
accommodate the metre.

Tbid. 18/744.

Also quoted above in 4/106-108ab.

See below note 4,930 ad 4/257cd-258ab where the Kulapañcasikā is quoted as

disapproving the growing of matted hair and the wearing of sectarian insignias as do

Śaiva ascetics.

MV 18/75-77, quoted below as 4/214cd-217ab. The entire passage from which these
lines are drawn is commented upon below, from 4/221cd ff.

There is nothing the yogi who is at one with pure consciousness should or should not
do.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


in themselves), are artificial (constructs), and so are incapable of becoming

even merely similar in just (some) small aspect to (our) yoga, which is
essentially nondual consciousness attained spontaneously. This is said (with the
words) ‘(the various ancillaries) such as breath control (are artificial

(constructs)) and s0 on.”

Surely (one may ask,) if that is so, as that (reflective awareness) is
uncreated and does not depend on (any) instrumental means, is (this teaching)

always true (and applicable) or not” With this doubt in mind, he says:

fk. arcza šatḷ frzāāē̃ī fāsfiīaa || g 1

ṝṁ a: ftetī̄á z aai atkif 1
kiṁ tv etad atra deveśi niyamena vidhīyate || 108 II

tattve cetaḥ sthirīkāryaṁ tac ca yasya yathāstv iti |
‘Rather, O mistress of the gods, it is enjoined here as a fixed rule
(niyama) that the mind must be firmly fixed on (ultimate) reality, and that

that be so for whomever in whatever way it may be (achieved).’ (108cd109ab)

So what should be enjoined here (in this teaching) as a fixed rule? (In

reply to this question, the Mālinīvijaya teaches): ‘the mind must be firmly
fixed on (ultimate) realityʼ, and the mind does not become firm (and stable)
here spontaneously (without cause). Thus, in this case, one must certainly

Read prāṇāyāmādyaṅgīkaraṇatayā for prāṇāyāmādyaṅgakaraṇakatayā.

Only Sound Reasoning, which is essentially the reflective awareness of
consciousness, is uncreated (akṛtrima) and authentic. All other forms of yogic practice

are derived from this one. They are created from it and so are artificial constructs and

secondary to it. The direct insight which is the spontaneous realisation of nondual
consciousness arises in an instant. One and eternal, it is not attained bit by bit, gradually
over a period of time. Thus, the ancillaries of Yoga, each of which are understood to

operate partially and successively, belong to the sphere of composite, temporal reality,

which is a creation of the fundamental, perennial uncreated consciousness. The Yoga
taught here is that of the direct insight consciousness has of its own nature through its

own naturally inherent power of reflective awareness. Reflective awareness, which
discloses the true unconditioned nature of consciousness, is ‘uncreated’. It is innate in

consciousness which, as the one eternal reality, is not created by anything. Thus, it is

totally different from the other forms of Yoga and their ancillaries that are, on the
contrary, artificial constructs.

The question here is whether there are any rules at all that need to be observed, or
whether they are all equally and invariably false. Or else, are they applicable sometimes

in certain circumstances?

TĀ 4/108¢d-109a is MV 18/78cd-79a. TĀ 4/109b is a condensed paraphrase of MV
18/79cd. Cf. below 4/120cd-121ab and 4/213cd ff. MV 18/79a reads sthirīkāryaṁ for

sthiraṁ kāryaṁ. The line in the MV ends with suprayatnena yoginā instead of tac ca

yasya yathāsṣtv iti.

TANTRĀLOKA

consider there to be some instrumental means (nimitta) (or reason for this to

take place). With this doubt in mind, he says ‘that that be so for whomever in

whatever way it may be (achieved)’. And that mind of the yogi, whoever he
may be, should be firmly fixed, independently of (any particular) fixed (niyata)
means (nimitta). This is the meaning. As is said there (in the Mālinīvijayottara):

‘In whatever way (that is conducive) to that, so should he practice

Thus it is said that as there is no (particular) rule (niyama): everything is
enjoined and (everything) is prohibited. This verse has been corroborated in

detail (in all respects) in order to show that (this is) the one unequivocal view of
the (entire) eighteenth chapter (of the Mālinīvijayottaratantra).
He concludes this (teaching as follows).

The Irrelevance of Conceived Forms of Worship (kalpitārcādyanādara)
Pure Knowledge and the Inner and Outer Cogitation of Consciousness

Tg £TTRTSĪTTI
TṀR: I| 2 8, I

fkēr: |

evaṁ dvaitaparāmarśanāśāya parameśvaraḥ || 109 ||
kvacit svabhāvam amalam āmṛśann aniśaṁ sthitaḥ |
In this way, the Supreme Lord abides somewhere, constantly
reflecting on His own stainless (amnala) nature, so as to put an end to the

awareness of duality (dvaitaparāmarśa). (109cd-110ab)

Surely (one may ask,) the Supreme Lord’s nature is nothing but pure
consciousness, of which the reflective awareness is that ‘ḹ alone am everything’.
Nor is it possible for it to differ in any way at any time, anywhere. So how is it
that it is said that He abides ‘somewhere’, constantly reflecting on His own
stainless (amala) nature? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Another possible translation could be: ‘if the mind does not become firm (and stable)

here spontaneously (without cause), one must thus, in this case, certainly consider some
means (nimitta) (by which it may become s0).”
MV 18/79cd.

? The absence of corroborative references on the part of Jayaratha and the distinctive
Pratyabhijñā terminology indicate that the passage from 109cd-122ab consists of
Abhinava’s own reflections.

There are two aspects of the reflective awareness of Śiva consciousness. One is the

awareness of duality, and the other, the awareness of nonduality. Immersed in the

former, the individual soul is bound. When Śiva chooses to grace the soul, he instils the
latter, inducing the soul to participate in it and hence be free of binding duality.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


yaḥ svabhāvaparāmarśa indriyārthādyupāyataḥ || 110 |I
vinaiva tanmukho “nyo vā svātantryāt tadvikalpanam |
The reflective awareness of the essential nature (of things can be
direct and) free of (outer) means, such as the senses and (their) objects etc.,

or it can be other than that, and have that (direct awareness) as its basis
(tanmukha). The cogitation (vikalpana) (that embraces these two forms of
awareness, the one direct and the other aided, and the choice between

them) depends (on the perceiver’s) freedom. (110cd-111ab)

Indeed here (in the course of perception, the reflective awareness of the
nature of things may be) established in the inwardly subtly manifest form
(ullikhitākāra) (of consciousness as the perceiver) alone, independently of (any)
means, such as the senses and (their) objects etc. Or else it can be a ‘reflective
awareness of the essential nature (of things), which is ‘other than that and

ha[s] that (direct awareness) as its basis (tanmukha); that is, one that has the
senses

and their objects etc.

as

its means, and follows on from

the

nonconceptual (nirvikalpa) (consciousness that precedes it, and is its basis).

Although that ‘cogitation’ (vikalpana), which is a thought construct (vikalpa),
possesses both natures, it is generated from the freedom of (the individual

subject)

who perceives

(kṣetrajña).

the field (of sensory

and mental

perception)

The word vikalpa is a substantive noun, that is, one that denotes a particular thing.

The word ‘vikalpana’ is an action noun. So if ʻvikalpa’ means ‘a thoughtʼ, vikalpana the
thinking of that thought, or one could say ‘conception’, as is translated here. Abhinava
uses the two terms vikalpa and vikalpana in this passage from 110cd to 114ab in a very

specific way, which he defines clearly below (in 113cd-114ab). There he says that
vikalpana is Pure Knowledge, which as we have seen is the experience of the insight

that “I am all this”. On the contrary, vikalpa, is the product of the ignorance (‘impure
knowledge’) of Māyā, that perceives and generates the experience of duality, division,
and difference between the perceiver and the perceived. Thus, vikalpana is both, as it is
the experience of the identity of oneself as the perceiver (i.e. ‘I am’), which is one, and

the object (‘all this), which is many. It is dynamic, as it moves freely from one polarity

to the other without exclusion or conflict. On the contrary, vikalpa, centred as it is on
the object, is static, confined, as it were, to it. Thus, from the perspective of vikalpa —
‘ṭhought’ — in the domain of Māyā, it excludes vikalpana — ‘conception’ — in the domain

of the insight of Pure Knowledge.

We can arrive at a better understanding of this verse by examining other possible
meanings and hence translations of it. These are as follows:

‘The senses and their objects can serve as a means to the reflective awareness
(Śiva has of) His own nature, or (independent of them,) it can be other than that (as
nonconceptual awareness). These (two) alternatives (vikalpana) (proceed) from (the
Lord’s) freedom (which is never restricted).”

Or

‘The reflective awareness (Śiva has of) His own nature can be devoid of means
such as the senses and their objects, or it can be other than that (while maintaining) that
(direct awareness) as its basis (tanmukha). That (alternative) conception (vikalpana)

TANTRĀLOKA

(between these two possibilities proceeds) from (the perceiver's) freedom (to choose
between them).”

The reflective awareness consciousness has of its own nature is described here

in relation to sensory perception. One of the points Abhinava makes is that
consciousness remains the same whether it is engaged in sensory perception or not.

When it is directed at objects of sense through the channels of the senses, in the initial

moment of perception everything is perceived directly as it is, that is, as a manifestation
within consciousness. This inner manifestation corresponds to an inner awareness

consciousness has of itself as all things and that all things are manifestations of
consciousness. Accordingly, Jayaratha calls this the ‘inner manifestation’ (antarollekha)
of consciousness, in which subject and object are still one. In the second moment of

perception, the individual features of the one unified manifestation of consciousness as
all things are defined as individual entities separated from one another and the

perceiving consciousness. This process is marked by another activity of consciousness,
namely, the formation of mental labels for individual entities and perceivers,
accompanied by concepts and notions concerning their nature, qualities, functions,
relationships between one another, and so on. The first stage is free of thought
constructs and characterized by oneness, the second is that of thought and is
characterized by multiplicity.
In this way, the reflective awareness of the one consciousness has two forms.
One is the pure reflective awareness of the perceiver’s own nature as all things, which is

internal, not objective, one and undivided. The other is that same reflective awareness

operating through the senses, and so relates to the objects of the senses. The former,
which is independent of the senses, perceives the inwardly manifest form of
consciousness as the intimate reflective awareness which is its all-embracing
subjectivity. Although the awareness operating through the senses perceives concrete
manifest forms, it must nonetheless be invariably preceded by the former nondiscursive
awareness. The former, in this respect, is the pure nondiscursive awareness which is the

underlying ground of perception and illumines all its phases, including the formation of
the thought constructs (vikalpa) that serve to identify specific objects. This essentially
amounts to the difference between the same reflective awareness when it has these two
aspects and when it does not. Thus, aṣ the spontaneous discursive cognition of the
perceiver, the reflective awareness of Śiva’s innate nature is both. To elucidate this
view, Abhinavagupta refers to consciousness engaged in perception with the word

vikalpana, which has two meanings. One is ‘alternative’, and the other can be translated
as ‘notion’ or ‘cogitation’. It is Pure Knowledge, in which awareness is of the form, ‘
am all this and all this am I˚. It is called ‘vikalpana’ because it encompasses the
‘alternative’ notion that ‘l am all this’ and ‘all this am I’ as a higher form of ‘cogitation’.

However, when this ‘cogitation’ — vikalpana — is not grounded in Pure Knowledge as

one of its two alternatives, then it is termed ‘vikalpa’, which is the stream of

dichotomizing notions generated by the sense of duality, which is the ignorance of

In both aspects — vikalpana and vikalpa — the pure subjective awareness
remains unaffected by objectivity; that is to say, it never descends to the level of a
thought construct. This is the aspect of awareness which, operating independently of the
senses, is the Divine Means, by which consciousness perceives itself and all the
universe it produces within itself, directly. The form of awareness which operates

through the senses and mind is active in the other two categories of means, Empowered

and Individual. The Empowered (śāktopāya) is essentially the exercise of reflective
awareness, engaged in the act of knowing. As knowledge of ultimate reality, which is
pure consciousness, is free of notions and mental constructs, the focus of the practice of


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


And that is of two kinds, and so he says:


āTÇCT I|222 1

I 222 1
hetk|tkaAtEE.EGEIĒYIÇZAI

tac ca svacchasvatantrātmaratnanirbhāsini sphuṭam || 111 II
bhāvaughe bhedasaṁdhātrṛ svātmano naiśam ucyate |
tad eva tu samastārthanirbharātmaikagocaram || 1 12 ||
śuddhavidyātmakaṁ sarvam evedam aham ity alam |
Again, that (cogitation is two-fold). (One) is called (the darkness)
of the Night (of Maāyā), which (perceives and) forges (saṁdhātṛ) the duality
between

one’s

own

(conscious)

nature

and

the flux of phenomena

(bhāvaugha) that manifests clearly within the jewel of the pure, free Self.

(The other is) that same (reflective awareness) directed entirely to the Self,

which is full to overflowing with all things. (This is) the Pure Knowledge
that “I am all this”, which is complete. (111cd-113ab)
‘Again, that’ cogitation (vikalpana) (is two-fold). It is this ‘Self’ which
is ‘purē’ (svaccha) because it is not made manifest by something else, and so
because it does not depend on anything else, is ‘free’, and is nothing but the
perceiver who is the supreme Light (of consciousness). It is (like a) crystal,
because it can bear the reflections (of phenomena within itself). Having made
‘the flux of phenomena (bhāvaugha), consisting of subjects and objects that
can manifest there at one with it, ‘clearly’ (manifest there within it), it is said to
be ‘(the darkness) of the Night’ of Māyā, because it (perceives and) forges the
duality (bheda) (between consciousness and the flux of phenomena) as (separate

this means is the active engagement of the reflective awareness of consciousness that
eliminates them through direct insight into its true nature. As we shall see, this is the

goal of the Individual Means below the Empowered one, as it is of the Divine one above

it. However, the sphere of practice of the Empowered Means is perception and its

instruments, which are primarily the mind and senses, and hence secondarily, the body

and the vital breath. Thus, the sphere of operation of this Means is the point of contact
between the unity of the subject (the experience ‘I am’) and the plurality of the object

(the experience ‘this is’). This unity-in-diversity is the Pure Knowledge experienced as

‘I am all this and all this am I˚. This ‘cogitation’ — vikalpana — is Sound Reasoning —
sattarka. As we shall see in the following chapter, the Individual Means is based on the

diversity of objectivity within the domain of Māyā, which thus serves as a means to
realisation (māyopāya). In that domain, practice begins with the body, senses, mind and
the vital breath operating in relation to objectivity.

The ‘cogitation’, ‘alterative notion’ or ‘conception’ — vikalpana — is the cogitation

in the realm of nonduality of the pure reflective awareness free of thought constructs
(vikalpa) that form on the lower level of Māyā, the realm of duality. The former is the
basis of the latter, which develops out of it. One with it, it is of two kinds, as explained
in the previous note.

TANTRĀLOKA

and) distinct from the (direct) presence of one’s own (consciousness).” The

meaning is that, by this general statement, all (phenomena) are described (in this
way). Again, that same conceived option (vikalpana) assumes the (other
opposite) form, of the sort ‘I myself am all thisʼ, and is established solely in its
own (conscious) nature, which is completely full of ‘all things’, and so is
‘complete’, that is, sufficient (in all respects to do this), and (so) as such is said
to be Pure Knowledge. This is the connection with (what was said) previously.
Surely (one may ask,) according to the dictum: ‘all thought is

transmigratory existence, all (forms of) thought (and notions) should be

abandoned. So what is the purpose of the aforementioned division (into two

alternative conceptions)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ē fdēhcūi JGTNaTTĒT
WGATWT I 223 1

idaṁ vikalpanaṁ śuddhavidyārūpaṁ sphuṭātmakam || 1 13 ||
pratihantīha māyīyaṁ vikalpaṁ bhedabhāvakam |

This cogitation (vikalpana) is Pure Knowledge (free of thought

constructs that,) clearly evident, eliminates the Māyic thought (vikalpa) that
generates (and ponders on) the relative distinctions (bhedabhāvaka)
(between things) here (in everyday life). (113cd-114ab)

(Pure Knowledge) ‘is clearly evident’. The meaning is that (it is a form
of cogitation that) has attained a state of direct (apprehension of the one reality,
which is pure, undivided consciousness,) by the process of purification of

thought constructs described previously. As it eliminates the Māyic thought
which is the cause ‘that generates (and ponders on) the relative distinctions

(between things) here (in everyday life)ʼ, this is (the form of cogitation) that
should be adopted (upādeya), because it generates (and ponders on) nonduality
(abhedabhāvaka). Thīs is what is said (here in this verse).
And, because of the (many) different objects of awareness, that (Pure


Knowledge) is of many kinds. Thus, he says:


The Perennial Rite of Pure Knowledge and Inner Worship

GTFTīTTĪ
a: āṃ ŪTa TaTRHT I| 223II
TTÇTGTHĪĪĪRTATTTTĀĪTRATT;|
śuddhavidyāparāmarśo yaḥ sa eva tv anekadhā ||

114 ||

The expression here is atyāpoharūpatvena, which literally means, ‘as something else

which is (its) negationʼ.

This dictum is quoted above in TĀv ad 1/214 and below ad 14/13 and ad 16/283cd-

284ab (284).

See above, 4/3-7.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


snānaśuddhyarcanāhomadhyānajapyādiyogataḥ |

4 (In the context of the ritual worship of the deity,) this same

reflective awareness, which is Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyāparāmarśa), is
of many kinds, according to whether it (arises) in association with the
ablution (snāna) (that precedes the rite), (the preliminary process of)

purification, worship (of the deity), the offering of oblations (to it), the
visualization (of it), or the repeated recitation of Mantra and the rest.

(114cd-115ab)

The domain of the Empowered Means is that of Pure Knowledge. The dualistic
perception of the world in the domain of Māyā is transformed into the play of the
polarities of subject and object as aspects of the contemplation (bhāvanā) which is the
sound discernment of identity. Once the stage has been set in cogitative cognitive terms,

in what follows, Abhinava describes it as the experience of the aesthetic relish of
worship. The perception of Pure Knowledge is a perpetual offering to the universe,

inwardly merged in consciousness. The rite unfolds through the following stages: A)
The yogi penetrates into his cosmic nature. B) He offers libation (tarpaṇa) to the Paths.
C) This is followed by the inner ablution, and D) libations (tarpita) to the deities of the
senses. Then follows E) the purification of the metaphysical principles of the body. F)

Beholding the body as the vessel of consciousness. G) The offering through the mind
and the senses.
The Tantrāloka is presented by Abhinavagupta as a ritual manual (paddhati) (above
1/14); accordingly, he always refers to ritual in relation to the categories of the means to

realization. Thus, in the previous chapter, while declaring that ritual is not operational at
all in the sphere of Divine Means (above, 3/280-290ab), he takes care to emphasize that
riṭual action ultimately reaches its goal in the realization of the pure supreme

subjectivity, which is the sphere of the Divine Means (3/294ab (293)), and so is not

useless. Here Abhinava explains the function of the components of the ritual worship of
the deity in the context of the Empowered Means. These outer forms of practice are

effective for the same reasons advanced with respect to the ancillaries of Yoga if they
are grounded in this reflective awareness and sustain it. Thus, it can be said secondarily

to be of as many kinds as are these outer practices.
In the course of expounding the experiences of the yogi who is immersed in the
empowered (śākta) (state of) penetration (samāveśa) (MV 18/28), the MV teaches how

phases of outer worship of the Deity are assimilated to them. There we read:

The yogi should always worship himself fervently with scent, flowers and the

like (placing the offerings on the top of his head, where) the Cavity of Brahmā is

located, or else (do this with just his) imagination. (43cd-44ab)
1) His bathing is effected (just) by making contact with (any) liquid substance.

(44cd)

2) (His) offering (yajana) (to the deities) is considered to be (merely his)
perception (grahaṇa) of the smell of perfume, flowers and the like. 3) His savouring of
the six flavours (of good food) serves as (his) offering of food (to the deities).
4) Whatever sound (he happens to) utter is said to be (his) repetition of mantra
(japa). (46ab)
5) (His) offering to the fire (homa) continues for as long as (his) mind is
focused there (on the sound) of anything that is burning burns. (46cd-47ab)
6) (His) visualization (dhyāna) (of deity) is considered to be whatever form he
(happens) to see. (This) great nondual (way of) worship has (thus) been taught by
implication (in relation to the subject at hand). (46-48ab) MV 18/43cd-48ab

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask,) how can this reflective awareness, which is Pure

Knowledge, remove the Māyic thought (vikalpa) which is established in duality
(bheda), if that also is said to have other modalities (which are required) in
order to apply it? With this doubt in mind, he says:

frēī-cckaafaftrzāfradTk
aaṛa | 2 1

sṝftrva yaī fhā% Tzīēzaāṁvza3|
viśvam etat svasaṁvittirasanirbharitaṁ rasāt || 115 ||
aviśya śuddho nikhilaṁ tarpayed adhvamaṇḍalam |

A) Once the pure (yogi who has attained this reflective awareness)

has penetrated (spontaneously) by virtue of (his) aesthetic delight (rasāt)
into this universe, full to overflowing with the aesthetic sentiment (rasa) of
his own consciousness, B) he should offer libation (tarpayer) to the entire

circle of the Paths (of cosmic manifestation). (115cd-116ab)

Sanderson (1992: 297-298) suggests that this passage inspired Abhinava’s
presentation of the higher nondual worship he maintains is taught in the Bhairava

Tantras, that he presents in the passage that follows (from 115cd to 122ab). Supported
by his prime authority, the Mālinīvijayottara, he teaches this in the context of practice

based on thought empowered by energy of the one ultimate dynamic cognitive
consciousness (anuttarasaṁvid), the Inexplicable (anākhyā). Thus, after defining how
this works in relation to ritual ablution (snāna) (4/116cd-117ab) and the other
preliminary purifications (4/117cd-119ab), Abhinava goes on to define worship itself in
these terms (4/121ad-122ab). This leads him to teach the form this worship takes in the

context of the Empowered Means (i.e. as a method of purifying thought) by an
exposition of the cycles of consciousness, focusing amongst them on that of the Twelve
Kālīs (4/122cd-181ab).

He then teaches how Mantra operates by analysing in this context the primary
seed-syllables of the deities (Parā and Kālasāṁkarṣaṇī) of the Trika and Krama systems
he integrates into his Anuttara Trika (4/181cd-193). He goes on to define the nature of
the repetition of Mantra (japa) practiced in the Empowered Means (4/194), the
visualization of the Deity (dhyāna) (4/195-199), Mudrā (4/200), and the offering of
oblations (homa) (4/201-202). He then concludes with an exposition of the nature of this

inner sacrifice (yāga) in general. (4/203-212).

Sanḍerson (2006: 50) translates: ‘Cleansed by joyfully immersing himself in this

universe brim-full with the <liquid>/<bliss> (rasaḥ) of his awareness, he should gratify

the entire sequence of cosmic hierarchies.”
All this takes place spontaneously by the power of the reflective awareness of
Pure Knowledge, not by the practitioner's own effort. He simply abides respectfully

attending on Śiva consciousness, ready to do whatever he intuitively senses, it suggests.

He penetrates into all things, recognising that they are the outpouring of consciousness,

full of its aesthetic delight (rasa), by the wonder he experiences of the infinite expanse
of his true nature, which is one with it. Savouring its aesthetic delight, it becomes
directly apparent to him in accord with its true nature, even as it becomes one with him.

Sanderson (2006: 50) sees here a reference to the initial purifying ablution. Although
not clearly stated, this may well be so, as ablution with water marks the very beginning

of worship. Moreover, Abhinava has referred to it in the previous verse as marking the
commencement of this inner worship. Then, the yogi, his senses active and enthralled,


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Here (according to this teaching), the yogi who possesses this kind of
reflective awareness ‘has penetrated’ into this universe, because of the
excellence of his reverence (ādara) (for Lord Śiva), by virtue of the fullness of

the wonder (camatkāra) of his own Self, by means of the process (that purifies
thought) which will be described (further ahead). Then he is thus at one with

the supreme subject, and so is ‘pure’. (In this state of purity, he) ‘should offer

libation to the entire circle of the Paths (of cosmic manifestation)ʼ, that is, he
should make it directly perceptible (to himself) (sāksṣāt kuryāt) as ‘full to

overflowing with the aesthetic sentiment (rasa) of his own consciousnessʼ.
This is the meaning. Having in this way established that there is no object of
worship etc. which is conceived (kalpita) in a fixed external form, after having
(explained) that the ancillaries of Yoga are of no use, the occasion has arisen to
(explain), as announced (previously), that (we do not) revere any conceived

(kalpita) (external) idol (arcā) or the like.

Surely (one may ask,) it is right to consider that (ritual) ablution and the
like are essentially forms of reflective awareness (in the domain) of Māyā
because (Māyā) (perceives and) forges duality, so how is it that (they are) said
to be (forms of) the reflective awareness of Pure Knowledge? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

I| 22, |

zā ṃss --z=ā |

ullāsibodhahutabhugdagdhaviśvendhanodite || 116 ||

sitabhasmani dehasya majjanaṁ snānam ucyate |

C) (The true, inner) ablution is said to be the immersion of the body
in the white ash (produced) when the fire (that devours offerings), which is

outpouring (ullāsin) (awakened) consciousness, has arisen, and the fuel of
the universe has been burnt away. (116cd-117ab)

offers the libation with reverence of the ‘juice’ (rasa) of the aesthetic delight (rasa) of

his own consciousness to all things. Thus, he experiences that the joys and sorrows of
the world are in reality the bliss of the contemplation of his own infinite Śiva nature,
and that his offering is for the benefit of the whole world.

The process that purifies thought, to which Jayaratha is referring and will be

described further ahead, is the recognition of the universal activity of consciousness in

twelve phases, as the worship of the Twelve Kālīs. See below, 4/122cd-180ab.
Read kaṭ
tvā for kaṭākṣayatā.

The point is that worship for the pure Yogi who has attained Pure Knowledge is not

‘conceived’, that is, imagined as it is as in the sphere of the Individual Means. At that
lower level, the Deity who is the object of worship is imagined to exist in the external
form that represents it, and so too all the rest of the components of the rite that
represents the sacred universe it governs and within which it is worshipped. At this level
of practice, all this should be experienced directly (sākṣār); nothing is imaginary.

Sanderson (2006: 50) translates: ‘The bath [which follows] is the immersion of his

body and other [levels of contracted selfhood] in the ‘white ash’ that remains of the
universe when he has incinerated it in the fire of his expansive consciousness.’

TANTRĀLOKA

That awakened consciousness (bodha), which is cognition (pramāṇa)
that, because it is propense (to manifest) externally, pours out of itself
(ullasanaśīla), is Fire, because it is the light (of consciousness). ‘The universe’
(of outer objects, such as the colour) ‘blue’, (and the inner ones) such as
‘pleasureʼ, are ‘burnt away’ by it, that is, made one with it, and because it is
what is to be burnt up (by the fire of consciousness), it is its ‘fuel’. When (this
fire) ‘has arisen’ from that, that is, when it has become established
(pratiṣṭhāna) by the union of both these two, the ‘ash’ (it produces is) devoid of
(all) (phenomenal) limitations (upādhi), (and so is) ‘white’. It is the supreme

reality, which is just the one, unlimited perceiver. ‘The immersion of the
bodyʼ, that is, of the limited subject (into it, takes place) by considering one’s
own (body etc.) to be secondary, and penetration (samāveśa) there as primary.

That ‘is said to be (the true, inner) ablution’, not the outer one with water

etc. The difference (between them) can be grasped by the power of the sense
(of this verse to convey this suggested meaning). As is said elsewhere with (this
same) intended meaning:

‘If (one could attain) liberation by bathing with water, why should fish

not be (liberated)?

Surely (one may ask,) outer ablution renders one fit to perform the daily
obligatory rites and the rest and the body etc. is also purified, so what is gained
from this kind (of bathing)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

itthaṁ ca vihũtasnãnas tarpitãnandadevataḥ tarpitãnantadevataḥ || 1 17 ||

tato ‘pi dehārambhīṇi tattvāni pariśodhayet |

D) He who has performed the prescribed ablution in this way and

offered libations (tarpita) to the deities of bliss (that govern the senses)

should then proceed to also purify the metaphysical principles (tattva) that
constitute the body. (117cd-118ab)
The limited subject, that is, one who identifies with the psychophysical organism,
abandons his limited, conditioned state by penetrating into unlimited, unconditioned
consciousness, and thus becoming one with it. This happens when he realizes that his

true nature is primarily consciousness, and his association with the body is a secondary,
adventitious and mistaken identification.

The ash represents the supreme reality, at one with the unlimited subject. It is white
because (consciousness, which is the one reality,) is free of limiting adjuncts. The body

represents the limited subject, and its ‘immersion’ represents penetration into this higher
level of being. It is not mere bathing.

Sanderson (2006: 50) translates: ‘When he has performed the rites of ablution and

gratified the infinite deities in this way he should ‘purify’ the levels of reality (tattvam)
which have given rise to the body [and the rest].” However, I prefer to read
‘tarpitānandadevataḥ (‘offered libations (tarpita) to the deities of bliss’) for


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

Surely (one may ask,) according to the (nondual) view (of the

Upaniṣads) that: ‘all this is indeed the Brahman’, all this, namely, the body and

the rest, is Śiva Who is the Supreme Brahman, and so how can there be purity
or impurity there? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ftrarṁcūāērrarrg
āfazdī zafīāēttī 1| 22. 1
ãñarzf:. Ūaṁī gēzītazm, 1

Śivātmakeṣv apy eteṣu buddhir yā vyatirekiṇī || 1 18 II
saivāśuddhiḥ parākhyātā śuddhis taddhīvimardanam |

E) "The supreme form of impurity (aśuddhi) is said to be the

(persistent) notion (buddhi) of separation (from Siva that prevails) within

tarpitānantadevataḥ (‘offered libations (tarpita) to the infinite number of deities’).
These are the deities of the senses, to which libation is offered in the manner described
above (in verse 115cd-116ab). Divinized by the infusion of the aesthetic delight (rasa)

of the awareness of God consciousness, the senses are satisfied by their objects in the

oneness of the wonder of consciousness. When insight develops in this way in the state
of supreme subjectivity (parapramātṛbhāva), the deities of the senses attain complete
fulfilment. Thus, when the ‘doors of perception’ are cleansed in this way, they serve to
heighten that consciousness and really satisfy it, whereas conversely, devoid of this
reflective awareness, they contract it.


Maheśvarānanda (MM: p. 43) quotes this verse as:


cidātmakeṣv apy eteṣu yā buddhir vyatirekiṇī|

saivāśuddhiḥ parā proktā śuddhis taddhīvimardanam

cf. sivātmakeṣv apy eteṣu buddhir yā vyairekiṇī | TĀ 4/ 118 I
saivāśudáhīḥ parākhyātā śuddhis taddhīvimardanam |
The meaning is the same, except the reading cidātmakeṣv ‘consciousness by

nature for śivātmakeṣv ‘Śiva by nature’.
Maheśvarānanda (MM: p. 43) quotes TĀ 4/118cd-119ab just after citing the

following line from the Paryantapañcaśikā: śuddhir bahiṣkṛtārthānāṁ svāhantāyāṁ
nimajjanam ‘Immersion into one’s own subjectivity is (the way) things that have been
externalized (from consciousness) are purified.’ He continues:
anye punaḥ śuddhim ittham asyā manyante — yat sadāśivādiṣv aham idam iti
sāmarasyaśālinī saṁvid asti, tatra sāmānādhikaraṇyād aikarasya yoge “pi
māyīyasyedantāṁśollāsasyāvarjanīyatvāt sadāśivādīnāṁ ca māyāvārtānabhijñatvāt so
‘yam

māyīyatādoṣavyudāsād
ahambhāvabhāgavad
anayā
pratīyamānatvenāvasthāpyate | tatpratītivyatireke tu tatsāmānādhikaraṇyam eva
bhajyeteti | ayaṁ bhāvaḥ ‘Again, others consider that purity (śuddhi) (to be a state of) consciousness that
0s
s the oneness (sāmarasya) (of the experience) that “I (am all) this” (aham idam)
had (on the pure reality levels), thatis, Sadāśiva and the rest. There (on those levels),
thereis union in oneness (aikarasayoga), because (both polarities share) a common

ground (in consciousness). But even so, as the outpouring of dualistic (māyīya)

objectivity is inevitable and Sadāśiva etc. are unacquainted with the condition of Māyā,
this objective aspect (idantāṁśa) is established, as is the subjective (ahaṁbhāva) aspect,

TANTRĀLOKA

(the experience of) these (metaphysical principles deployed in the body,

although they are in fact) Siva by nature. Purity is the obliteration of that
notion. (118cd-119ab)

‘Separation’ is (the duality of) relative distinctions (bheda). ‘That
notionʼ is the notion of separation. As is said:
‘There is nothing impure. Everything is established there (in
consciousness). Whatever is devoid of that becomes, for that reason, impure.


And so, what of that? Thus (in order to explain,) he says:


because by removing the defect of Māyā, it is perceived (in this way) by this (subjective
consciousness). When that perception (of objectivity) has been removed, (objectivity)
should share a common basis with that (subjectivity). The sense is as follows:
bhagavataḥ paramaśivabhaṭṭārakasya paśūn api kāṁścit pramātRn prati sadāśivādi
nirviśeṣam anujighṛkṣotkarṣād aśuddhavidyākalaṅkaprakṣālanāvinābhūtā svasvabhāvapratyabhijñāpanātmīikā saṁvitsvātantryaśaktiḥ śuddhavidyā, yām avalambya

vijñānakevalā rudro

Ś‘gniś ceti pramātrvaicitryam iti sa ity anenedantā-

krāntasyārthasya kārtsnyena koṭyantaratvadyotanārtham ahambhāvasyāvāpoddhāra-

buddhyupalabdhaṁ kaivalyam unmīlyate |

The Lord Paramaśiva (bestows the) Pure Knowledge, which is the power of the

freedom of consciousness that brings about the recognition of one’s own essential
nature. It is invariably associated with the cleansing of the stain of (limited, binding)

impure knowledge (brought about) by the excellence of (His) desire to grace some
perceivers, although they are fettered souls, equally without distinction, to (attain)

Sadāśiva and the other (higher reality levels). Taking (His) support from (that Pure
Knowledge, Paramaśiva unfolds) the variety of perceivers, namely, Vijñānakevalas,
Rudra and Agni (etc., up to) the liberated state of subjectivity (ahambhāva) perceived
by the intellect, that extracts (its presence) sown (within it) in order to illumine the
interiority (of that) polarity of (the aspect of) reality pervaded by objectivity in its

entirety by that (variety of perceivers).”

After the senses have been satisfied in this way, the next thing to do is to purify the

metaphysical principles that constitute the body. This is done by the spontaneous
expansion (unmīlana) of consciousness the yogi now experiences, which purifies it,
transforming it into Śiva’s own pure body. Although all the thirty-six metaphysical
principles are one with Śiva, the notion of separation (vyatirekibuddhi) induces the
fettered soul to perceive the constituent principles of the body as separate from each

other and from Śiva. As Pure Knowledge dawns in the process of the unfolding
awareness of Śiva consciousness when the senses are active, the individual form of the
principles in the body are recognised to be essentially the same as those from which all

things are made. Thus, externally, the yogi experiences everything around and within as
his body. As the Śivasūtra (1/14) says: ‘the perceptible is (his) body’. Inwardly, his

body is a pure vessel of Śiva consciousness.

Sanderson (2006: 51) sees in this and the following verse a reference to the
process of the deposition Mantras and letters on the body (nyāsa), which he calls ‘the
imposition of the ‘body of ‘the pantheon of mantras.' The ‘body” (mrti) is here the

mantra as the sonic iconic form or ‘body of the deity, and the pantheon of mantras are
the sonic forms of the main deity’s attendants.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


I| 22 l

evaṁ ṣvadehaṁ bodhaikapātraṁ galitabhedakam || 119 II
paśyan saṁvittimātratve svatantre tiṣṭhati prabhuḥ |

F) Beholding his own body in this way, as the unique vessel (pātra)

of (awakened) consciousness, free of duality, the (yogi) master (of all)

(prabhu) abides in a state of (pure) free consciousness alone. (119cd120ab)

The meaning is that one should experience the pure conscious nature
directly, by applying (prayojakīkāreṇa) the attributes of freedom and the rest
present within the Self (which is one’s own true nature), by disregarding
(nyakkāreṇa) the (false) arrogation of Self to (the body etc.) that is not the Self,

‘in this wayʼ, that is, in the manner described.
Having explained in this way that (inner) ablution and the rest are not

īmaginary (akalpita) (as are their lower, outer representations), he (now goes
on to) explain the other ancillaries of worship (in the same way).

aā aāṁrzaiī 1 2 2 1
aṇszdi JJaTāaīT-ī ṬSĪTGTVĪ f€ q |
yat kiñcin mānasāhlādi yatra kvāpīndriyasthitau || 120 ||
yojyate brahmasaddhāmni pūjopakaraṇaṁ hi tat |

G) “Whatever delights the mind, wherever the senses may (happen

to be operate, through which it is perceived) and is conjoined, that unites
One could possibly emend the text from bodhaikapātraṁ — ‘the unique vessel (pātra)

of (awakened) consciousness’ — to bodhaikamātraṁ — ‘just (awakened) consciousness

alone’. If the body is the vessel of consciousness, that would entail a residue of duality

between the possessor of consciousness and the consciousness it possesses. Even so, I

have chosen to accept the reading as it is, because here at the level of Pure Knowledge,

consciousness contemplates itself as all things, on the analogy of the identity the

conditioned consciousness of the individual soul has with his body. Pure Knowledge is

a state of immanent, universal consciousness of identity, not transcendence, although the
Lord Who perceives the universe as His body in this way is always pure transcendental

consciousness. Cf. ŚSū 1/14 dṛśyaṁ śarīram — ‘the perceptible is (His) body°.
See below, note 4,361.

This verse corresponds to MVV 2/124, which reads yujyate bodhasadbrahmadhāmni

brahmabilātmani ʻunites (the devotee) to the Abode of the True Brahman of
Consciousness, which is the Cavity of Brahma (at the top of the head) for yujyate
brahmasaddhāmni pūjopakaraṇaṁ hi tat ‘(whatever) unites (the devotee) to the abode
of (the radiantly beautiful) Brahman’s Being is an aid to worshipʼ. Sanderson (2006: 51)

understands this verse as referring to the inner mental equivalent of the worship of the

Self (ātmapūjā), which is done by placing a flower on the Cavity of Brahmā at the top
head. Thus, he translates the verb ‘yojyate’ not as ‘unitesʼ, as translated here in accord
with Jayaratha's interpretation, but as ‘placed’, as follows (ibid.): ‘Whatever delights his

TANTRĀLOKA

(the worshipper) to the abode of (the radiantly beautiful) Being of the

Brahman, is an aid to worship (pūjā). (120cd-121ab)

mind in any of the fields of the senses is then ‘placed’ <in the light of the real which is
the Brahma>/<upon that place of nectar which is [the aperture of] Brahmā. For it is thus
that it becomes a true offering [to the circle of powers of consciousness].”

S The VBh 74 similarly teaches: “One should maintain one’s attention wherever the
mind finds satisfaction. It is there that the inherent nature of Supreme Bliss arises.”

Swami Lakshmanjoo explains: “Whatever is displayed joyfully in your brains should be
offered to God. For example, you feel joy from embracing a beautiful girl [or man], that

is the worship of Śiva. You must not embrace her [or him] for your own joy. Offer that

joy to Śiva in the Heart [of your consciousness, that is, in] brahmasaddhāmni
[Brahman’s Abode of Pure Being] which is sākṣātkāra [direct realization of the

Absolute] Offer the joy of sex to Śiva, don't taste that joy yourself. It is for Śiva.
Worshipping is really this differentiated perception of the world of objectivity, united
with pure, independent Bhairava consciousness.” The expression ‘whatever delights the
mindʼ (yat kiñcin mānasāhlādi) is a standard one. A verse that makes a similar point,
quoted from an unidentified source in TĀv intro. to 29/21ab, also begins this way. So

also does the following one, quoted by Kṣemarāja in SvTu ad 2/131-135 to explain the
‘secret inner equivalent of the food offered to the deity and then consumed in the
course of worship (naivedya). ‘All of whatever delights the mind, having first
contemplated it with the method (yukti) that corresponds to it, is one with Bhairava,
because it is one with all things and so merges it all in that, its own (and one’s own)
abode (which is consciousness). (personal communication)

Similarly, Abhinava affirms:


“The inner (spiritual) wealth of the sacrifice (yāgaśrī) becomes well established
there in whatever external place the lotus of the heart blossoms (vikāsa).” TĀ 15/107cd-

108ab


One reason for this is made evident in this meditation taught in the VB:

yatra yatra mano yāti tat tat tenaiva tat kṣaṇam |
parityajyānavasthityā nistaraṅgas tato bhavet ||
‘“Wherever the mind moves, having by that (very mind) at that (very) moment

abandoned whatever (it moves to), it has no fixed place and so (left without support),
one becomes free of (its) fluctuations.” (129)

However, for this to take place, the yogi should be free of the desire that causes

him to cling to objectivity — to some particular place or thing — and hence agitate the

mind that seeks to find ways to get what he wants and avoid what he does not. The VBh

itself supplies the practice to remedy this craving:

jhagitīcchāṅṁ samutpannām avalokya śamaṁ nayet |
yata eva samudbhūtā tatastatraiva līyate ||

‘Having observed that a desire (has just) arisen, it should be put to rest

immediately. Thus it dissolves away there from whence it has come forth.” (96)

Thuṣ ultimately, on whatever path we travel, whether it be the common one of

self-restraint or the less common one of those who are graced with an experience of the


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


‘Whatever’ thing (it may be), without any restriction, that ‘delights the

mindʼ, in whichever (field of) the activity of the senses (it may happen to be
perceived, and) ‘is conjoinedʼ to the beauty (śobhana) which is the Brahman,

the radiant energy (tejas) that is quite different from (outer light) such as that of
the sun and moon, making it directly apparent as (pure) consciousness alone,
by abandoning its external nature (that appears to be outside consciousness).
(Thus) that is (then) ‘an aid to worshipʼ, by which worship (pijā) (of the deity)

is completely fulfilled.” This is the meaning.

Surely (one may ask,) is this not (a new) definition of worship, unheard

of before? With this doubt in mind, he says:

r̥ ī āīrza vrarzaī̃ aāṣgf u 222 1
TATHTJT-TĪTĀĪTA JIGṬHT

pūjā nāma vibhinnasya bhāvaughasyāpi saṅgatiḥ || 121 ||
svatantravimalānantabhairavīyacidātmanā |

“Worship (pūjā) (in the highest sense) is (the process of) uniting

(again) the diverse (and separated) flux of phenomena with Bhairava’s

independent, stainless and infinite consciousness. (121cd-122ab)

Lord’s presence, it is essential to be free of attachment and desire in order to rise to the
recognition of our own, free, omnipresent Śiva nature.

Read sūryacandrādi- for sūryācandrādi-.

S Objects that are pleasing to the senses need not be distractions. Indeed, they can serve

as a means to worship the Deity if they are experienced within consciousness. In order
to do this, the misconception that the body is separate from consciousness must be

eliminated. The body, like all else that is objective, is always experienced within

consciousness. By the exercise of attention to this, the false notion that they are external

gradually disappears and gives way to a direct experience of the Deity Who is
consciousness, which the soul’s true nature. In this way, the body and the outer world
are inwardly united with the splendour of the Absolute Brahman, and are experienced as

offerings to Him as the Self.
Sanderson (2006: 51), translating ‘pūjā’ as ‘the presentation of the offerings to the
deities, understands this verse to be a reference to the inner equivalent of the outer

offering to the deities that have been invoked onto the earthen platform (sthaṇḍilam) or
their idols (liṅgam).
Cf. below 4/180cd-181ab. The interiorization of worship is a practice that belongs to
the category of Empowered Means (Sāktopāya), as it involves a purification and

empowerment of conceptualization, which culminates in the pure nonconceptual

consciousness of the Divine Means (Śāmbhavopāya), in which the recognition of one’s

on true Śiva nature takes place. Abhinava is telling us that that grooms the mind for
inner worship. Thus, Somānanda found it fitting that his great work on nondualist

Śaiviṣm, the Śivadrṣti, that paved the way for his disciple Utpaladeva’s philosophy of™
Recognition - Pratyabhijñā - should conclude with an account of the internalized forms

of the ancillaries of Yoga and the elements of ritual. The passage is ŚDṛ 7/78-106. This
is translated below. The interiorizations are as listed. Following the numbering of the

verses in the ŚDr comes that of verses in this chapter of the Tantrāloka relating to the
same interiorization. They are as follows: Visualization (dhyāna) ŚDr 7/78-80 (cf. TĀ

4/195 and VBh 146 (144)), Yoga ŚDṛ 7/81-84, repetition of Mantra (iapa) ŚDṛ 7/85-87

TANTRĀLOKA

(cf. TĀ 4/194 and VBh 144cd-145 (142cd-143) and 156 (154-155ab)), Ablution (snāna)
ŚDr 7/88-89ab (cf. TĀ 4/116cd-117ab and VB), Offerings to the Fire (homa) — ŚDr
7/89cd-92ab (cf. TĀ 4/201-202 and VBh 149-150ab (147-148ab)), Worship (pūjā) —
ŚDr 7/92cd-95ab (cf. TĀ 4/121cd-122ab and VBh 147 (145) and 153 (151)), and the
Sacrifice (yajana) — ŚDrṛ 7/95cd-106 (— interiorization of worship (B)).

Going through them one by one, he writes in Chapter Seven:

‘Visualization (dhyāna)
Visualization (dhyāna) in the highest sense (paramārthika) is whatever (the
yogi) fashions externally and internally by his own (free) will out of his own (true
conscious) nature (which is endowed with the power) of emanation (sṛsti). (TA 4/195)
Visualization (dhyāna) is the immobile, formless and unsustained intellect.
Meditation does not consist of imagining the face and hands etc. of the body (of a deity).
VBh 146
dhyānaṁ nāmātra yat sarvaṁ sarvākāreṇa lakṣyate |
bhāvanācakṣuṣā sādhvī sā cintā sarvadarśinī || 78 II
yena yenendriyeṇārtho gṛhyate tatra tatra sā |
Śśivatā lakṣitā satyā tad dhyānam api varṇyate || 79 |
yasyāṁ yasyāṁ pratītau tu śivo ʻsmīti manogamaḥ |
tasyāṁ tathaiva cintāyāṁ tad dhyānam api jalpitam || 80 Il
Here (what is meant by) dhyāna is that everything is viewed with the eye of
contemplation (bhāvanā) as beīng omniform; wise (indeed) is that contemplation (cintā)
that sees all things.
By whatever organ of sense an entity is perceived, there in each place Śiva's
state is perceived as (truly) existing — that too is described as being dhyāna.
In whatever perception (the notion) comes to mind that ‘I am Śiva’, that too is
said to be viṣualization, that (occurs) in that very way within that thought (cintā).
Yoga
yasminn arthe sadā tyāgo gacchatas tiṣṭhato ‘pi vā |

dhāvataḥ khādato vāpi sa yogaḥ parayoginaḥ || 81 II
bhāvite bhāvite vāpi śivatve śivataiva me |

sarvadā pitṛmātrāditaulyadārḍhyena yogitā || 82||
tathāpi kośahemādisādṛśyaṁ yogasatyatā |
Śivo ʻsmīti madicchātaḥ sarvabhāvapravartanam || 83 1|
ata eva śivaḥ sarvam iti yogo ‘tha cetasi |
santataṁ śaktisantānaprasareṇa sadaiva me || 84 ||

Constant renunciation, (whatever) be the purpose, while moving, standing,

running or eating — that is the Yoga of a supreme yogi.
The state of Yoga (obtains) with a stability like that of (the love of one’s own)
father or mother, (by reflecting that) whether the Śiva nature (śivatva) (of all things) is
contemplated (bhāvita) or not, I always possess (that) very Śiva nature (śivatā).

‘In the same way, the truth of Yoga is like a treasure or gold. “ am Śiva”, and

so all things take place in accord with my own will.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

Thus, this Yoga (is constantly present in my) mind, namely that ‘Śiva is

everythingʼ, (and everything) is always strung together by the continuous flow of my
power.

The Repetition of Mantra (japa)
Whatever one who is established in this uncreated Heart does, or (however) he
breathes or reflects, is all considered to be his repetition of Mantra (japa). (TĀ 4/194)

O gazelle-eyed Goddess, this procedure (prakriyā) (of reciting Mantras and

performing rituals) here (in this scripture is considered to be) external and gross. The
contemplation (bhāvanā) that is experienced (and takes place) repeatedly again and
again iīn the supreme state is here (according to this scripture) the repeated recitation of
Mantra (japa). It is the spontaneous Sound (of consciousness). Such is the nature of
Mantra that should be repeatedly recited. VBh 144cd-145 (142cd-143)

The inner practice of the repetition of Mantra belonging to the Individual

Means according to the Vijñānabhairava:

Following along, and abiding within her, in the sacrificial rite made of Great
Bliss, may he who is penetrated by that Goddess attain supreme Bhairava. It is taught
that the repeated recitation (japa) of the goddess (Who is the Mantra HAṀSAḤ) takes
place 21,600 times in the course of one day and night. It is very hard to attain at the
termination of the vital breath. VBh 155-156 (153-155ab)
aniruddho japo ‘sty eva sarvāvasthāsv asau japaḥ |

nānākāraiḥ sadā kurvann udayan sarvavastugaḥ l| 8 1I

abhyāsenāsmi so ‘py atra japaḥ parama ucyate |

saṅkalpāṁ janayann asmi sthitaḥ śabdān ato mukhe || 86 |
so hi nāmajapo jñeyaḥ satyādis trividho hi saḥ |

na me bandho na me mokṣas tau malatvena saṁsthitau || 87 ||
Uninterrupted repetition of Mantra (japa) is that repetition that (persists) in all
states, doing it constantly in many forms and arising present in all things.
“The supreme (form of) the repetition of Mantra (is attained) by the practice ‘I
am here and so is Heʼ. ‘ḹ abide (here) generating intentions and thus (also) words in
(my) mouth.”
That should be known to be the repetition of (Siva’s) name and as truth (satya)
etc.; it is of three kinds, namely (the notion that) ‘I am not boundʼ, ‘I am not liberated’
and ‘those two (bondage and liberation) are the Impurities (of ignorance that sullies the
soul)ʼ. (87) (Concerning inner japa, see above 1/89cd (90cd).
Ablution (snāna)
(The true, inner) ablution is said to be the immersion of the body in the white
ash (produced) when the fire (that devours offerings), which is outpouring (ullāsin)
(awakened) consciousness, has arisen and the fuel of the universe has been burnt away.

(TĀ 4/116cd-117ab)

(Real) oblation (homa) is the offering of all the elements, the senses and (their)

objects etc., along with the mind, into the fire which is the Abode of the Great Void,

TANTRĀLOKA

with the sacrificial ladle of awareness. O Supreme Goddess, the sacrifice (yāga) here is

the satisfaction which is bliss. (VBh 149-150ab (147-148ab))

pratipattyānayā snānaṁ nirmalīkaraṇaṁ matam |
duḥkhe vāpi sukhe vāpi sarvāsu pratipatiṣu || 88 II
Śivo 'smīti manohlādo jalasnānaṁ paraṁ matam |
cin nirmalā tanmayaṁ hi jagad asmi tathāvidhaḥ || 89 ||
ity āsthā jalaśaucena śuddhisnānaṁ tathoditam |

Bathing is considered to be (a process of) purification that takes place by

means of this understanding (pratipatti), (whether) suffering or happy (indeed) in every
experience (pratipatti).
The mental delight that “I am Śiva” is considered to be the highest (kind of)

bathing with water. “Consciousness is pure. The universe is of that nature (and) IĪ aṃ

(also) like that.” This is (my firm) conviction (that has come about) by purification with
(this) water. Purifying bathing is spoken of this way. (89-90ab)
Offerings to the Fire (homa)

The fire (of consciousness) burns constantly and intensely without need of any

other fuel, its awesome flame pouring forth from all the senses. Phenomena entering this
fire of consciousness, intensifying its glorious splendour, become the means to offer

oblation. (TĀ 4/201-202)

sarvabhāvāḥ śivākārā antarbhũūtāḥ śivānale || 90 ||

so 'haṁ śivaḥ sutr̥pto ʻsmi homa ity uditaḥ paraḥ |

atrākāre na yan me 'ṣṭi tad ākārāntare ‘sti me || 91 ||
tasmād asmi nirākāṁkṣas trptyā nyo (> tu) homa īdṛśaḥ |

“AII ṭthings are forms of Śiva and they are within Śiva’s fire. ḹ am He — Śiva

who is well content!” This is said to be the supreme offering to the fire (homa). (90cd-

91ab)

What is not mine in (this) form here, is mine in (some) other form. Thus,
because of the contentment (I feel), I am devoid of craving. Such is the offering to the

fire. (91cd-92ab)
Worship (pūjā)

cf. TĀ 4/121cd-122ab
(Real) worship (pūjā) is not (performed by just offering) flowers and the like. It
is that which makes the intuitive mind (mati) firm (and stable) in the Supreme Sky (of

transcendental consciousness), free of thought constructs. By the devout (performance

of) that (kind of) worship, (the mind) dissolves away. (147)
Those sacrificial substances with which Parā and (Bhairava) the Supreme

(Lord) (parāpara) are worshipped, or with which they are offered libation, and he who
is the worshipper- all this is one. What then remains of worship? (153)

pūjanān nāsti me tuṣṭir nāsti khedo hy apūjanāt 92.||
|I
pūjakair avibhedena sadā pūjeti pūjanam |

atrākāre ca me pūjā yā syāt sādāśivātmani || 93 ||

liṁgādike pūjito ‘smi sadā pūjeti vā sthitā |


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


pūjakaḥ pūjanaṁ pūjyam iti sarvaṁ Śivaḥ sthitaḥ || 94 |
kim etenātmabhāvena tṛptyā vā parapūjanam |
“T am not satisfied by worship, nor am I troubled by not worshipping. Worship
always takes place at one with those who worship.” This is (true) worship. The worship

that takes place here in my (physical) form is within Sadāśiva’s nature. (In that case) I
am worshipped in a Liṅga and other such (forms of Lord Siva). Or else it abides as

perpetual worship. (In that case,) the one who worships, the act of worship and the
object of worship — all (that) is Śiva. Or (does) supreme worship (take place) by the
satisfaction (that comes) by this, one’s own state (ātmabhāva)? (92cd-95ab)
The Fire Sacrifice (yajana)

sarvākāreṣu bhogyena yajanaṁ mama vartate || 95 ||

bhuñje 'haṁ yatra tatrāpi bhogalagnaḥ prattitaḥ |
sśivo smi sādhanāviṣṭaḥ śivo haṁ yājako 'py aham 1| 96 |
Śśiva evānayā sthityā satyayā yāga uttamaḥ |
yena yena yatra yatra yair yair yad iha cejyate || 97 ||
sa mayā kriyate yāgaḥ śivatvād yāga uttamaḥ |

My sacrifice takes place by means of the object of enjoyment within all forms.

Where I have worldly experience, there too do I adhere to worldly experience by way of
perception. (95cd-96ab)

I am Śiva engaged in spiritual practice (sādhanā). I am Śiva and it is I also who

offer sacrifice. This being the situation, it is Śiva Himself who is the most excellent
sacrifice. (96cd-97ab)

By whosoever, wherever and with whatever (offerings), sacrifice takes place
here, I perform that sacrifice which, because it is Śiva, is the most excellent. (97cd98ab)
Śivaṁ yāmi śivo yāmi śivena śivasādhanaḥ || 98 II
bhinno ‘py abhinna evāsmi śiva itthaṁ viceṣṭanam |
Śśivo bhoktā śivo bhojyaṁ Śśiveṣu śivasādhanaḥ || 99 ||

bhuktvodeti śivāvasthā sthitetthaṁ bhoktṛrūpatā |
Śśivaḥ kartā śivaḥ karma śivo ʻsmi karaṇātmakaḥ || 100 ||
Śśiva eva phalāvasthā vyāpāra iti sādhuṣu |

I go to Śiva. I who am Śiva am going. The spiritual practice to attain Śiva

(Śśivasādhana) (is done) by Śiva. Although I am separate (from Him), I am not separate

(from Hiṃ) — such is the way Śiva behaves. (98cd-99ab)
Śiva is the worldly experiencer (bhoktr) (of the consequences of Karma). Śiva
is that which he must experience. the spiritual practice to attain Śiva (śivasādhana)

(goes on) within (us, the countless) Śivas. Once (all the consequences of Karma) have
been experienced, Śiva’s state arises and abides in this way (as) the nature of the one
who experiences (the consequences of Karma). (9cd-100ab)

Śiva is the agent, Śiva, the action (karman). I am Śiva, who is the instrument

(of action). Śiva Himself is the state of the fruit (of Karma); such is the buṣiness (of

daily life) amongst the wise. (100cd-101ab)

bhāvanākaraṇābhyāṁ kiṁ śivasya satatoditeḥ l 101 II

yathā tathā pratiṣṭhāmaḥ prabuddhasyeti vartanam |

TANTRĀLOKA
‘The flux of phenomena’

consists of the

‘diverse’

(types of

sensations), namely, (the sight) of form, taste and the rest. “(The process of)

uniting’ (it consists of) making (it) one with the supreme conscious nature,
which, free of limiting adjuncts and undivided by time and space etc., is full
(and all-embracing). That is experienced as (the supreme form of) ‘worship’.
The point is that this (teaching) is not just our own idea. As is said (in the

Vijñānabhairava):

‘(Real) worship (pūjā) is not (performed by just offering) flowers and

the like. It is that which makes the intuitive mind (mati) firm (and stable) in the

Supreme Sky (of transcendental consciousness), free of thought constructs. By
the devout (performance of) that (kind of) worship, (the mind) dissolves

away.”

What have meditation and means (to realisation) to do with Śiva, who is

perpetually manifest (and active) (satatoditi)? Just as we are well established, so is the

condition of one who is well awake. (101cd-102ab)

yad dr̥śyaṁ yac ca saṁspr̥śyaṁ yad ghreyaṁ rasyam eva yat |l 102 ||
yac chrāvyaṁ tac chivavyaktes tac chivatvena saṁśritaḥ |

gamye grāhye tathā vācye sukhādāv api sarvadā || 103 |
sthite śivatve baddhāstho bhavet sarvagataḥ śivaḥ |

mantavye cābhīmātavye boddáhavye dhṛtisaṁgamāt |I 104 |
sukhe duḥkhe vimohe ca sthito ‘haṁ paramaḥ śivaḥ |

pratipāditam etāvat sarvam eva śivātmakam || 105 ||

(Whatever) can be seen, touched, smelt, tasted and heard belongs to Śiva’s
manifestation, and has come forth as Śivahood. Śivahood abides as that whichis to be

attained, grasped, and spoken, and
so too alwaysin (the experience of) pleasure and the

like; present in (all that is) bound, Siva is omnipresent. (102cd-104ab)
In what is to be approved, desirable and to be known with a firm resolve, (and
s0 to0) in pleasure, pain and delusion I, supreme Śiva, am present. In this way,

everything has been established to be Śiva. (104cd-105)
na svabuddhyā śivo dātā śivo bhokteti śāstrataḥ |

iti kathitām (> -tam) aśeṣaṁ śaivarāpeṇa

jagad uditamaheśāṁghryājñayā svapnabhājā (> -jam) |
yad adhigamabalena prāpya samyag vikāsaṁ

bhavati śivamayātmā sarvabhāvena sarvaḥ l 106 |1

That Śiva is (considered to be) the benefactor (of the world) and that Śiva (is
the individual soul who) experiences (the consequences of Karma) is not own’s own
idea — it comes from the scriptures. Thus it is said that all the universe is Siva. The
universe (that has came into existence) by the command arisen from Maheśa’s feet,
sleeps. Once having attained the correct (state of consciousness) expansion by the power
of (sound) understanding, the Self, which is Śiva, is by virtue of His universal being
(sarvabhāva), everything.” (106) Thisis how the ŚDṛ ends.
The Vijñānabhairava adds the interiorization of sacred place, which is a
cardinal feature of Kaula practice:

“O Pārvatī! the penetration of Rudra’s power is the sacred place of pilgrimage

(kṣetra), which is supreme contemplation (parā bhāvanā) because it removes (kṣapanāt)


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

Such is the nature of the oblation (homa) and the rest (of the other

rituals) also, because they too, in the same way, are aids to worship. This is

established (implicitly) by the sense (of the teaching), and so has not been
taught directly (for each one of them separately). Moreover, that has been said
before many times, and will be (again), and so one should understand this in this

way.!

Surely (one may ask,) how can something which is (quite different)

from something else be made one with it, so that that can also be said to be the
defining characteristic of (true inner) worship etc? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

all sins and saves all (living beings) (trānāt). Otherwise, what worship (could there be)
of that (nondual) reality, and who (could be) satisfied (thereby)? (150cd-151) (148cd-

149)

The exhaled breath (prāṇa) should exit and the living being (apāna — the
inhaled breath) should enter. (Impelled) by the will, its form is crooked. That Great

Goddess is extensive (dīrghātmā), both transcendent and immanent (parāparā), She is
the most excellent sacred field (kṣerra).” VBh 154

VBh 147 (145) also quoted above in TĀv ad 1/21. See there note 1,332.
“ See above, note 359. In his Tantrasāra Abhinava explains:

‘Pure Knowledge is nothing but that (Sound Reasoning) that is purified in
various ways, that is, with the sacrifice (yāga), fire offerings (homa), repetition of
Mantra (japa), the observance of a vow (vrata) and Yoga. The sacrifice (yāga) is the
offering of all things to the Lord alone, in order to confirm this notion, namely, that all
things reside solely within Him and nothing exists separately from Him. There the
external use of all things that are pleasing (such as flowers, offerings, scent and the like)
is enjoined insofar as the (best) offering to the Lord is that of all these things which,

because they are pleasing, tend to enter spontaneously into consciousness (cf. above,
4/120cd-121ab).

The offering to the fire (homa) is the dissolving away of all things into the fire
of divine consciousness, in order to attain this stable notion that all things are made of
the fire of the Lord which, conceived as an intense desire to devour everything that
exists, should be all that remains of them (cf. 4/116cd-117ab, 201-202). In the same

way, the repetition of Mantra is this inner cogitation, namely that the supreme reality
exists in itself, for itself, and is not independent of differentiated objectivity, in such a
way that a reflective awareness arises that embraces both terms (cf. below, 4/194).

The vow (vrata) is the perception of all things, including the body and (any

common object) like a jar, in this way, that is, that they are one with the Lord. It is said
in the Nandīśikhātantra that ‘the supreme vow is the equality of all things.' Yoga is
(thuṣ) a special determinate representation (vikalpa), the nature of which is an attentive
reflection (anusaṁdhāna) of the essential nature of ultimate reality (paramārthatattva)
in order to corroborate this conviction that all that exists is nothing but the eternal Light
of ultimate reality which, even though it shines by the (many) wonderfully various

conceptual representations (vikalpa) which are aspects of Pure Knowledge, is, even so,
completely independent of them.” TSā p. 25-27

How can this finite, conditioned, temporal and spatial reality be united with Śiva
consciousness that is quite the opposite, in such a way that this true inner worship,
which is defined by and as this oneness, can take place?

TANTRĀLOKA

The Arising of the Cycles of Consciousness (saṁviccakrodaya)

|| 22 1
TTT--TTRTHTS THYTAĒĪTTĪ |
tathāhi saṁvid ev eyam antarbāhyobhayātmanā || 122 ||

svātantryād vartamānaiva parāmarśasvarūpiṇī |

"In the same way, this same consciousness manifests by virtue of
its freedom as both internal and external (reality), even as it persists as

essentially (pure) reflective awareness. (122cd-123ab)

Verses 122cd-180ab are dedicated to the Wheel of the Twelve Kālīs. Abhinava

introduces the Twelve Kālīs with a presentation of the twelve phases of the cycle of

perception (pramāṇa), with which Abhinava identifies them. This begins with verses
122cd-127 and concludes in 145-147. It appears as if Abhinava had written them
together initially and then inserted the lengthy passage from the Yogasaṅcāra.
The Kālīs are energies or aspects of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, the Goddess of the
Kashmiri Kālī Krama, who is experienced by the awareness of their incessant activity.
The subject is also treated in the TSā p. 28-30 (quoted below in note 4,469) and briefly
in MVV 1/935-942 (quoted below, note 4,469). See Sanderson's discussion (1986: 197204) and Silburn’s Hymnes aux Kālī, Le Roue des Énergies Divines (1975), which,
entirely dedicated to the Twelve Kālīs, focuses on this passage. In the Empowered

Means they are experienced as the phases of worship outlined in the previous verses. As
Sanderson (2006: 51) explains: ‘The principal inspiration of this language of higher
riṭual in the Trika and its colonies is the Krama. The sequence of the external rites
(pūjākramaḥ) is transformed into the liberating contemplation of the natural cycle of the
Goddess Cognition (saṁvitkramaḥ) which is the special practice of that tradition. So

Abhinavagupta explains that his ‘presentation of offerings to the deities (pūjā), namely
the reunion of alienated objectivity with the pure subjectivity established by the
preliminaries (from ‘ablution’ onwards), is the contemplation of the fact that reality is
pervaded by the twelve Kālīs of the Krama’s Sequence of the Nameless

(anākhyakrama), that is to say, by the Goddess as she manifests herself within the

diminution or increase of her power in the twelve moments of manifestation, from the
initial projection of subjectivity which sustains that awareness into the egoless light of
nonduality.”
Maheśvarānanda quotes this verse in conjunction with SpKā 14ab: ‘Moreover two
states called the ‘agent’ and the ‘product of action’ abide here’. He goes on to say that
according to their view: yadā svasmin hṛdayaprakāśarūpa evātmani tiṣṭhati, tadā
vimarśaḥ śuddho vimarśa ity eva vyavahriyate | yadā tu vikalpopaśleṣalakṣaṇaṁ
kṣobham anubhavati, tadā viśvavistāraḥ prapañcasphuraṇavaicitryātmā (p. 34) vimarśa

iti tatrādhiko viśeṣaṇāṁśaḥ kaścid utpadyate | evaṁ ca prakāśasya vimarśaḥ svabhāva

ity aṅgīkāryam | etadvyatirekaś ca svabhāvabhaṅgaparyāyatvāt tasyāprakāśatvam eva
prayojayati | tataś cāyaṁ sphaṭikamukurādivad alpaprakāśaḥ stambhakumbhādivad
aprakāśo vā syād ity uktaṁ bhavati |
‘If reflective awareness abides within its own self, which is the Light of the
Heart, it is then said to be pure reflective awareness. Whereas, if it experiences the

disturbance which is association with thought constructs, then a certain extra qualifying
aspect (of the Light) arises, namely, the expanse of all things, which is the wonderful


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


variety of the effulgence of the world of daily life (prapañca). One should accept that in
this way reflective awareness is the essential nature (svabhāva) of the Light (of
consciousness). Separation (of awareness) from that (Light) is synonymous with the
destruction of its own nature and so renders it devoid of Light. Thus, what is being
stated (in this way) is that it would be a small light, like that of a crystal or mirror, or
(even) no light at all, like a pillar or a jar.”

Maheśvarānanda goes on to quote from an unknown source:

saccitsukhamayaḥ śambhuṣ trirūpaḥ sarvavastuṣu | iti |
ittham antarbahirbhāvavaicitrye ‘pi prasarpati |
yaugapadyamayīṁ svasya vimraṣṭrtvamayīṁ sthitim |l
anuśīlya janaḥ svacchām aiśvarīṁ śriyam aśnute |

evam etadupekṣāyāṁ pāśavena vimuhyati l

yathā yathā vijrmbheta svasaṁrambhacamatkriyā |
tathā tathā vikalpānāṁ vikṣobhaḥ kṣayam aśnute |l
kalayāpi vimarśasya vīryavattā vipaścitaḥ |
tanvyāpi viṣakākiṇyā durlaṅgho hi bhujaṅgamaḥ || iti Iḷ
nanu viśvavyavahāro hi bahirgrāhyārthatayā vartamānaḥ katham ātmasvabhāvo
vimarśaḥ syād ity āśaṅkyāha pṛthvīparamaśivayoḥ pratyāhāre prakāśaparamārthe |
yo ʻnyonyaviśeṣaḥ sa eva hṛdayasya vimarśonmeṣaḥ ||
‘‘Śambhu, who is being, consciousness and bliss, possesses (these) three forms

in all things. He flows along in this way even when the wonderfully varied relationship

between inner and outer obtains.
By being in accord with his own abiding state, which is
that of the subject engaged in reflective awareness consisting of the simultaneity (of

inner and outer), a person attains the pure lordship and glory (of consciousness). In the
same way, (conversely,) when he is indifferent (to that), he is deluded by the fettered
state.

To the degree and manner in which the wonder of the dynamism of his own

(inherent nature) unfolds, so does the disturbance of thought constructs come to an end.
A wise man is endowed with (great) vitality by even a (small) degree of awareness. A
serpent is hard to cross because of even just a small amount of poison.’

Surely, all daily life (viśvavyavahāra) goes on as an externally perceivable
reality; how can reflective awareness be one’s own nature (ātmasvabhāva)? With this
doubt (in mind), it is said:
The mutual differences within the conglomerate (of all the reality levels),

ranging from Earth to Supreme Śiva, the ultimate nature of which is the Light (of

consciousness), is the unfolding of the reflective awareness of the Heart.’ MM p. 33-34
(commentary on verse 11).

Consciousness freely assumes two forms — internal and external, subjective and

objective. Internally it is one with Bhairava. Externally, it is the objective world. The

following exposition, the core of which is the Cycle of the Twelve Kālīs, is an analysis
of the reflective awareness of the process which is consciousness (saṁvitkrama) taught

in the Krama system. Abhinava has introduced it in this way as the pervading activity of
consciousness marked externally by the phases of the liturgy (pūjākrama), of which he
has presented the inner ‘uncreated’ (akritrima) and ‘unconceived’ (akalpita)
equivalents. In this perspective, these are the outer and inner reality manifested by

consciousness.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘This same consciousness,’ the nature of which has been explained,

‘manifests by virtue of its freedom’ in (both) an internal and external form.
Thuṣ, in reality there is nothing else apart from that, and so it is reasonable to
say (that worship is the process of) making the diverse flux of phenomena one
with the conscious nature. Surely (one may ask,) how is it that even when

(consciousness) manifests externally, its own essential nature can be the
reflective awareness of (pure) ‘I’ (consciousness)? With this doubt in mind, he

says that: “(it persists as) essentially (pure) reflective awarenessʼ’. Thus, in

this way also, it does not fall from its own essential nature. This is the meaning.

Such is the reflective awareness (of consciousness), that it manifests as
all things. Thus, he says:

a
aaā] āJ̄ JaTT’ĪTaTT:
| g33 1
g tē fē dṁaā # # feava: ftaa: 1

hTICJTHTCHḤ TCATECṬTTTTÁĪT: I 22% I

sa ca dvãdaśadhã tatra sarvam antar bhaved yataḥ || 123 ||

sūrya eva hi somātmā sa ca viśvamayaḥ sthitaḥ |
kalādvādaśakātmaiva tatsaṁvit paramārthataḥ || 124 ||

And that is twelve-fold there, as it includes everything within
(itself), and is the Sun (of perception), which is the nature of the Moon (of

bahīrūpatāvabhāsane ‘pi even — lit. ‘when its exteriority manifests’. ‘Internal’ and

‘external’ are states consciousness assumes. Everything is consciousness; there cannot

be anything outside it. Here ‘outside’ consciousness means everything that is perceived

objectively. This not only includes outer objects, but also mental images and the activity
of the mind. They are also experienced objectively, that is, as objects with respect to the

perceiver, who is ‘intemal’. We may understand this polarity more ‘externally’ by
understanding ‘external’ to be outside ourselves and ‘internal’ within ourselves, that is,
our thoughts and feelings etc. We may also understand it more ‘internally’ by taking
both these polarities to be ‘external’ with respect to consciousness itself. However much

we ascend up the ladder of internalization or descend down it, the innermost subjective
polarity is grounded in self-awareness, which is that of consciousness itself. Thus,
consciousness polarizes ‘externally’ even as it abides ‘internally’ unchanged as the
essential self-reflective awareness of the perceiver. This play of inner and outer amounts
to the formation of thought constructs (vikalpa), the primary function of which is the
externalization of consciousness that thereby splits into the inner ‘I’ and outer ‘this’ in
such a way that the perception (pratīti) arises that ‘I know this’. But even so, the pure

noetic state (the ‘know’ part) which is consciousness is not divided up thereby. This

reflective awareness of ‘knowing’ is the basis for both the limited individual ‘T and its
object. This ‘knowing’ knows that it knows and itself as knowing. As such it is pure ‘’

consciousness, which although it is not the individual perceiver, fundamentally, the
individual perceiver is it.

Abhinava introduces his exposition of the Twelve Kālīs as a primary means of
purifying thought here in the domain of the Empowered Means by explaining that this is
possible because the reflective awareness of ‘inner’ and ‘outer’, which is conceptual, is
essentially the same reflective awareness of pure consciousness which, free of thought,

is neither ‘inner’ nor ‘outer°.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


objectivity), and abides as all things. That consciousness is in reality
(paramārthataḥ) made up of twelve digits (kalā).√ (123cd-124)
“ Abhinava is now going to expound his teaching concerning the ‘inner’ sequence of
the phases of consciousness (sarvitkrama), that correspond to the sequence in which
the assembly (cakra) of Kālīs are worshipped (pūjanakrama) externally. In order to
understand the point of Abhinava’s exposition, it is necessary to know the basic model

of worship of the goddess Kaālī in the early Tantras. Its initial phase developed in the
Jayadrathayāmala, to which Abhinava refers with special reverence as the
Tantrarājabhaṭṭāraka — the Venerable King of the Tantras. This vast seminal work,
divided into four parts of six thousand verses (ṣatka) each, is an extraordinary source of
Kālī worship. It refers to many forms of Kālī, of which it presents procedures (kalpa) to
worship them, some of which continued to be worshipped in Kashmir until recently (see

Sanderson 2006b: 17). One of the principal ones, who emerged as the goddess of the

Krama, is Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. The first part (ṣaka) is originally a self-contained work on
the cult of this goddess (ibid. p. 21 n. 55), whom Abhinava takes to be Kālī herself (cf.
4/177), and refers to her directly in that form in several places. Kālīs may be worshipped

in groups (cakra) alone without male partners to form pure female maṇḍalas. Embedded
in these procedures are sections dedicated to the Kālīkula, also called, Kālīkrama, which
constitute the initial revelations that developed through subsequent independent
Kālīkula Tantras (notably the Kramasadbhāva and Kālikulapañcaśataka). Sets of
configurations emerge that came to be the standard ones for the worship of Kālī in these
traditions. As Kālī is the Goddess of Time (kāla), it is appropriate that these

configurations be understood as phases or aspects of the cycles of cognitive time that

Kālī encompasses. These are basically four cycles (cakra) represented by four
configurations (cakra) of Kālīs, namely those of emanation (srṣticakra), persistence
(sthiticakra), withdrawal (saṁhāracakra), and a fourth called the Inexplicable
(anākhyacakra), because it encompasses the other three in a manner that defies
definition as either sequence or stasis. The details vary within this basic model. The
form accepted hereis one in which there are sixteen, twelve, eight and four Kālīs, and

aṣsociated deities, arranged around a central one, in the four Wheels, respectively.

Sometimes a fifth is added, called the Wheel of Illumination (bhāsācakra), which need

not concern us here. The name however indicates another cardinal feature of the

Goddess, namely, her luminosity. This is represented in the Tantras themselves by the
identification of the first three Wheels with the Moon, which has sixteen digits (kalā),
the Sun, which has twelve, and Fire, eight. The fourth Wheel, which is like the fifth, is

the Light of consciousness itself, contains four digits, one for each of the three Wheels,
and one of its own. All this we find in the original Tantras themselves, which supply the
names of the Kālīs in each Wheel. Abhinava, who is not concerned with their outer
worship, refers only to the twelve Kālīs of the Wheel of the Śun by name.

From its inception, as evidenced in the JY, Kālī’s metaphysical nature was

unḍerstood to be dynamic cognitive consciousness, denoted by the usual words for

consciousness, along with one which came to denote this understanding of

consciousness most specifically, namely, saṁvid. The JY already contains statements

declaring the essentially unity of the perceiver and the perceived as aspects of the

dynamic unity of consciousness, and the seeds are already sown for the kind of
phenomenological idealism that is the hallmark of its most developed form as the
Krama school (kramanaya), also called the Great Reality (mahārtha), which in the
English studies is called the Krama system (kramadarśana), or simply Krama. There is
no need to summarize all features of this complex system here. The essential point is
that it teaches that Kāḹī as Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī is the Goddess of Consciousness (sarviddevī)

Who is the perpetually active power of consciousness that ‘measures out’, ‘manifests' or
‘emits’ the streams of perceptions that constitute all things. From this perspective, the

TANTRĀLOKA

‘That’ supreme subject and reflective awareness is twelve-fold, and
manifests as all things. This is the meaning. After (having explained) that
(externally) imagined (kalpita) (ritual) worship is not (worthy of) attention
(compared to the inner worship that takes place within consciousness), (the
teaching concerning) the Dawning of the Cycle of Consciousness
(saṁviccakrodaya) (that is, the Twelve Kālīs), which was announced in the
initial enunciation (of the topics of the Tantrāloka), is also introduced in this

way.

Surely (one may ask,) the All (visśva), consisting as it does of (the
countless) perceivers and (their) objects etc., (possesses many forms and aspects

and) is of many kinds, so how is it that it can (all be) gathered together by
subsuming it (upātta) into just the means of knowledge alone, which is the Sun,

consisting of twelve digits (kalā)? With this doubt in mind, he says that it ‘(is
twelve-fold)

there

(as

it

includes

everything

within

(itself))’.

‘everything’ (is meant) subject and object etc. Indeed (it was said) here:

(By)

‘The supreme principle of Fire is indeed that of the subject.
According to this teaching, the perceiver, who is supreme
consciousness, is Fire, as it burns the fuel of duality. And it is nothing but selfawareness alone (ahampratītimātra), which out of its own freedom, shining

forth in twelve ways as the organs of knowledge and the rest (of the senses),’

Kashmiri exegetes identified the Wheels of the Moon, Sun and Fire as those of the
spheres of the object (prameya), means of knowledge (pramāṇa) and the subject

(pramātṛ), respectively. Understood as phases of the act of perception, which is

consciousness — saṁvid, they serve as markers of the cycle of perception through and as
which it unfolds. This then is the fourth Wheel, namely, the resultant noetic
consciousness (pramiti), which is the supreme subjectivity. The subject, set as it is in
relation to the other phases, is associated with objectivity. The pure noetic

consciousness which is the result and basis of their interaction is entirely free of all

objectivity.
Swami Lakṣhmanṇjoo (2010 p. xii footnote 21) explains, ‘There is a difference
between pramātṛbhāva [subjectivity] and pramitibhāva |[noetic cognition].
Pramātr̥bhāva is that state of consciousness where objective perception is attached.
When that state of pramātṛbhāva is attached with objective perception, that is the pure
state of pramātrbhāva. When it moves to the state where there is no objective
perception, there is no touch of objective perception, it is beyond objective perception,
that is pramitibhāva.
This is the wheel of the cycle of consciousness itself (saṁviccakra), which is
that of the Inexplicable. It is the Fourth state (turīya) of the direct experience of
consciousness, that pervades and sustains the states of waking, dreaming and deep sleep,
corresponding to the subject, means and object of knowledge. Abhinava focuses on the

cycle of the means of knowledge, that of the ŚSun, because it contains all the others. As

such, it encompasses the phases of emanation, persistence, withdrawal, and the

inexplicable fourth state, in each of the domains of the subject, means and object of
knowledge, thus making twelve. Held together in the pure consciousness of the
Inexplicable, this is the ultimate reality of all the processes (krama) of consciousness.
Ṉ Above, 3/123cd (123ab).

The twelve senses are the intellect and mind, along with the five organs of action

(hands, feet, genitals, anus and speech) and five cognitive organs of sense (taste, sight,


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


is established on the level of the means of knowledge (pramāṇa) and is said to
be the Sun. The means of knowledge is the subject’s extroverted (bahirmukha)
form, and so the perceiver there, in (the corresponding) degree, becomes its
inner state. The means of knowledge is perception (jñāna), and that does not
arise anywhere without a basis, and so it must necessarily include the object of
perception, and so that is also included here. He says that ‘it is the Sun’. The

‘Moonʼ is the object of knowledge. As was said before:

“(The wise) say that the Sun is the means of knowledge, while the Moon
is ṣaid to be the object. (Although) they are both independent, they are not

separate from one another.”

It is ‘all things’ because all things are objects of perception (meya).
Thus, as everything is included here (within it), supreme consciousness that
manifests in the form of all things in actual fact arises twelve-fold. So it is

rightly said that ‘that is twelve-fold’. Thus he says that (that consciousness) is

'made up of twelve digits’. The digits are (its) aspects as the subject and the

Surely (one may ask,) others say that this (consciousness) consists of

thirteen (aspects), so how is it that it is said here to be just twelve? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

hearing, smell, and touch). Note that the ego (ahaṅkāra), which is normally the third
member of the internal organ of sense (antahkaraṇa), along with the intellect and mind,

is not included. Thīs is because it is represented by the pure self-awareness, which

manifests as these twelve when operating in the sphere of objectivity, which is the outer
domain and aspect of consciousness.
Above, 3/122 (121cd-122ab).

Abhinava defines the word kalā below in 4/173-175, based on the five meanings of

the root kal, from which it is derived. The Tantras exploit its multiple meanings, as
Abhinava does, to indicate a number of things at once. First of all, at the most
immediate ‘external’ level and general non-technical sense, the word ‘kalā’ denotes the
phases or ‘digits” of the moon. These are sixteen, as are the lunar days (according to
certain astrological calculations) from a New to a Full moon. Analogously, the sun has
twelve, one for each of the signs of the zodiac it traverses in the course of a year. We
have seen that in the context of this symbolism, as exemplified by the
Yogasaṁcāratantra, Fire has eight, and departing from this natural symbolism, the
transcendent Inexplicable has four. In this perspective, the word ‘kalā’ could be

translated as ‘digit’, in the sense of a part or ‘phase’ in a cycle. Moreover, ‘kalā’ also

means energy. The word ‘śakt’ means energy in general. The word ‘kalā’ resonates
with the additional sense of a unit of energy. Thus, we get the additional sense of
‘modality° or ‘function’. In other words, consciousness viewed as a process consists of
twelve ‘phases’. As the totality of reality encompassed in the dynamism of this

cognitive consciousness, it has twelve ‘functions’, ‘modalities’ and ‘energies’. The
twelve aspects, as we have seen above, are subject, means and object of knowledge,

each of which arises, persists and falls away, and has an indefinable aspect as
consciousness itself, which encompasses the three moments in timeless immediacy.

The earliest Tantric sources do, in actual fact, describe the Wheel, which here

consists of twelve Kālīs, as having an extra thirteenth one in the centre. Sanderson

(2007: 257) explains, with reference to the section called the Procedure (vidhi) of the

TANTRĀLOKA

sā ca mātari vijñāne māne karaṇagocare |

meye caturvidhaṁ bhāti rāpam āśritya sarvadā || 125 ||
And this (consciousness) shines perpetually, assuming a four-fold

form (as emanation, persistence, withdrawal and the inexplicable),” 1)

within the subject (mātṛ), 2) within the cognitive consciousness (vijñāna),
which is the means of knowledge (māna) in the sphere of the senses, and 3)

within the object of knowledge (meya).

Kālīkṛama in the fourth part (ṣaṟka) of the Jayadrathayāmala, that there (in chapter
four) is taught ‘the Krama's culminating circle (śāktaṁ cakram) of the thirteen Kālīs,

twelve surrounding and mirroring their source.' The thirteenth Kaālī in the centre is
portrayed as reflecting in her mirror-like face the twelve surrounding Kālīs. Sanderson

(2007: 260 n 84) explains that initiation into the maṇḍala of the thirteen Kālīs is taught
in the Kālīkramavidhi section of the fourth ṣatka of the JY. He writes that ‘it is this set

of identical Kālīs that Viśvāvarta hymnsṣ in the last verse of his Tantrarājāvatārastotra,

implying that the teachings of the Tantra culminate here . . . “ḹ sing the praise of the
sequence-transcending circle of powers animated by the supreme Goddess that

resembles a single face appearing in contact with a series of mirrors.’ Śivāṅanda
himself, the founder of the Krama school in Kashmir, accepted that there are thirteen

Kālīs (Sanderson 2007: 271). The thirteenth is the supreme Kālī, who manifests as the
twelve. (See below, note 4,672, with reference to Kālikāstotra v. 5) Similarly, according
to the surviving Kālīkula Tantras, there is a Kālī in the centre of the other Wheels, as we
find in the Devipañcaśatika. The Yogasaṁcāratantra Abhinava quotes further ahead
refers to Wheels of sixteen, twelve, eight and four constituents. However, the text has

been lost, and there is nothing in the references Abhinava draws from it to establish that
it is a Kālīkula Tantra, which it most probably was not.

Jayaratha considers this discrepancy — thirteen Kālīs according to the textual
sources, and just twelve taught by Abhinava — to be a serious problem. Thus, he

discusses the reason for it at length here and returns to it several times in his
commentary. The deity in the centre of a Wheel is normally understood to be the source
of the surrounding forms that attend on it as aspects or emanations of it. Thus, the issue

here is essentially the relationship, if any, between a supposed pure transcendental

consciousness, which is free of all cognitive processes, and the source of its dynamic,

immanent form as all of them. In this perspective, the question is whether the supposed
thirteenth aspect, which is pure consciousness, is something separate and beyond the
twelve differentiations.

Swami Lakshmanjoo explains that Anākhyā -- the Inexplicable — is the gap between
the perceiver and the means of perception, the means of perception and its object, the
object and the perceiver.

In the parallel Krama sources, both before and after Abhinava (with the sole

exception of MP (2 Tri) that follows Abhinava), we find the basic three to be emanation,

persistence, and withdrawal. They mark the phases of each of part of the ‘four-fold
formʼ. Thus, Krama sources in this context may refer to the cycle of emanation
(sṛṣṭicakra), rather than just emanation itself. Thus, here again we witness one of the
major features of Abhinava’s Trika exegesis, namely, the substitution of basic triads
with phases of perception shining in the subject, means and object of knowledge. In the


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


‘Cognitive consciousnessʼ (vijñāna) is an adjective qualifying the

means of knowledge. (The teacher) means to say that the nature of the other
(aspects of perception) are the means of knowledge, although it is also (both)
consciousness (bodha) (as the subject) and the absence of consciousness
(abodha) (as the object). (Cognitive consciousness) is ‘within the sphere of the

sensesʼ, that is, it has become the field of operation (viṣaya) of the means of

knowledge.” This is the meaning. Otherwise (if this were not s0), the object in

itself (independent of perception) is nothing at all. This is the point. (The word)

‘and’ indicates a reason."® ‘This’, ultimately real consciousness, assuming a

‘four-fold form’ as emanation (sṛsti), persistence (sthiti), withdrawal and the

Inexplicable (fourth), ‘always manifests' in the subject, means and object of

knowledge. The meaning is that it shines radiantly, without a break (or
limitation), in each one (of the three) with (its) four-fold nature, and so is

twelve-fold. As is said:

‘The form of the radiance of the Moon, Sun and Fire which is

omnipresent and unlimited, associated with the sequences of emanation and the

rest,” makes (all things) clearly manifest.’

Again:


‘Whatever plane of (awakened) consciousness the one who knows

reality enters, having attained (there) within it a state of identity (tanmayatā)
(with the object), attains a four-fold nature.”
purely Trika context, he does this right at the beginning of the Tantrāloka, where he
praises the three goddesses Parā, Parāparā and Aparā as this triad.

The term ‘means of knowledge’ ~ pramāṇa — generally denotes a particular valid
means of knowledge, such as direct perception, inference, scripture, valid testimony and
the like, whereas here it is fundamentally cognitive consciousness, which is the essential
nature of all other things, whether they are conscious subjects or insentient objects.

Functionally, it is the capacity of consciousness whereby the object of knowledge is
made known to the perceiver. Concretely, it is the power of the senses (both external
and inner, mental) through which it operates as its instruments.

Coṇsciousness shines without a break in all twelve domains of perception at all
times. It is because ‘this (consciousness) shines perpetually” that it is these twelve. This,
Jayaratha tells us, is what the word ‘and’ suggests.

Judging by the content and terminology, it is clear that all the references Jayaratha

quotes here in his commentary on this verse are from Krama sources.

Each of the phases of emanation, persistence, withdrawal and the Inexplicable, that

constitute the sequence of the activity of consciousness (sarṁvitkrama), are themselves
sequences (krama). In the Tantras from which these teachings are derived, the term

krama — which literally means ‘sequence’ — denotes the sequence of the liturgy. We

have noted already that each Wheel is populated by forms of Kālī. They are worshipped

generally, in the normal way, just by uttering simple Mantras that contain their names
and salutation. This is done in sequence, in accord with their location in the Wheel. In
this perspective, the Wheel of Emanation (sṛsṣṭicakra) and the others have their own

‘krama, as does the whole ritual procedure, which is, accordingly, also called a
‘krama’. When the deities of the Wheels, and indeed the entire liturgy, is understood to
be an outer expression of the sacred cognitive activity of consciousness — saṁvitkrama,
the metaphysical sense of the term comes to the fore.

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask,) others maintain, following this very same
approach, that this supreme (fully expanded) consciousness has thirteen aspects
(not twelve). As has been said (in the Mahānayaprakāśa):

‘The one essential nature (of all things) abides as the subject, object and

means of knowledge,” having penetrated into the (the cycles) consisting of
emanation, embodiment (avatāra) (i.e. persistence) and withdrawal. Each one
(of them), in accord with their own nature, are four-fold, due to the categories

(bheda) of emanation, persistence and the rest (i.e. withdrawal and the
Inexplicable, brought about by their progressive) differentiation (kalanā). The

four-fold outpouring (vibhava) (of consciousness brought about by their)

emergence (udaya), that ends with the absorption of time (kālagrāsa) (along

with) its state of rest (viśrānti), which is just one (alone), thus (consists of)
thirteen goddesses located in the Cycle of the Inexplicable, who, because of
their fundamental (and predominant nature) (prādhānyāt), are the objects of

worship.”

“We don’t understand,” (asks an opponent), “how it is said here to be

twelve-fold?” (We reply that) here, (with regard to this question,) that it is said
that here (according to our view), supreme consciousness manifests twelve-fold

in the aforestated manner, by virtue of its own freedom (to do so). To this
extent, there is no disagreement. Now if that supreme consciousness were to
manifest separately, apart from those twelve forms (of consciousness), then it
would be its the thirteenth (form). Otherwise, what other (reality) could be the
thirteenth (aspect)? If consciousness were to be separate (from tits
manifestations), the twelve forms would not manifest, as they (would) not be

consciousness, and so all that would remain is one (unmanifest) consciousness
1 Read with the MP (2 Tri) —pramātrṛtaḥ for —pramātrtāḥ.

MP (2 Tri) reads vihito (‘is proper’) for vibhavo (‘outpouring’).

Concerning these four phases in the process of absorption, see above, note to comm.
3/266ab (3/265).

These lines correspond to the anonymous MP (2 Tri) 9/15-18. According to this

passage, the thirteenth aspect is the ‘state of rest’ within consciousness. This is

consciousness itself, perpetually at rest within its own nature, and so this state is ‘just

one (alone)ʼ. Abhinava does not consider this to be a separate condition, whereas, as
Sanderson (2007: 315) points out, all the Krama sources that refer to this matter do. The
earliest of them is by the founder himself, Jñānanetra, who writes in his Kālikāstotra (v.
8-9):

“The unitary nature of (your) essence becomes triple in the aspect of Emission,
Stasis and Withdrawal; each of these assumes four aspects, through Emission, Stasis,
Withdrawal and Rest. Supreme is your form that by thus dividing your spontaneous
essence into twelve, sets in motion the whirl that is your unfolding (vivartaḥ) as the

world.” verses 8-9, Sanderson's translation.

The twelve phases culminate in this state of transcendental rest, in which they

are grounded and of which they are its apparent transformations. This is the thirteenth

Kālī, within whom the twelve phases manifest as one with her pure conscious nature,
perpetually at rest within itself. See above, note 4,369.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


devoid of manifestations (nirbhāsā). So what occasion could there be for a

thirteenth form? Now if (you say that) even if consciousness is separate, it
(nonetheless) pervades the twelve forms as would a universal (its particulars),

and also manifests as it is in its own essential nature. Thus, such is its state as

the thirteenth (form). Then we would say that that is wrong (asar). A universal

differs from (its) particulars, and so as such pervades them so that (wherever
one perceives a cow) the notion (pratyaya) that it is a cow associated with it is
the same (every time one sees a cow). Again, those forms manifest just as

they are within consciousness; they are not separate from it, for if that were to

be s0, they would not manifest. Thus, whatever be the forms that manifest, one

says just the same that ‘consciousness manifests’. How and by whom is that
known? (There is no possible reply to these questions,) as the example does not

correspond (to what it is supposed to exemplify), that it be something.° It is
said elsewhere with the same intended sense that:

‘It is manifest that (when we experience that,) phenomena (bhāva)

manifest, the Self manifests within consciousness. It is manifest that (when we
experience that) the Self manifests within consciousness, phenomena manifest.”
Now if (you were to ask,) does not this same supreme consciousness
manifest in a form which is coloured (by its) twelve-fold nature, and as the
thirteenth, which is pure consciousness alone, it is uncoloured (by them)? (We
reply) that that is not so. Here our established view (siddhānta) is that supreme
pure consciousness is unmanifest (nirābhāsā), devoid of limiting adjuncts, and

(is essentially) uncoloured (by any external reality, as a crystal would be by a
red flower placed next to it). And that (consciousness), having hidden its own

essential nature by the glorious power of its freedom and manifesting (its)

nature as all things, would (then) manifest in the form which is coloured with
the twelve-fold nature. Its uncoloured form would not manifest then (at the

same time) as separate from it and uncoloured (by it). If that were to be so, then

the coloured form itself would not manifest. This has been said (already) many

times.

Surely (one may ask,) even when it is (immanent) as all things, it is
possible for its transcendental (nature) to be uncoloured, otherwise that would

We see a cow and think, ‘this is a cow’. In this way, the cow we perceive is identified

as a cow because it is the same as all other cows, or to put it another way, it is at one

with the one universal cow. A particular cow is not different from (the universal) cow

that pervades it: From this point of view, the ‘universal cow’ is what the word ‘cow’
denotes. When we experience that ‘this is this cow’, the name-cum-universal is linked to
the particular cow and we identify it as such.

Read yāni yāni for tāni tāni.

Consciousness accompanies the perception of everything and anything equally. It

makes no difference whatever it may be. Anything that is perceived and manifests can
be an occasion to experience the presence of consciousness within which it manifests.
Moreover, this is equally so for every perceiver.

The experience of the manifestation of phenomena within consciousness is not the

same as that of the perceiver. The former are many and objective, whereas the latter is

only one and not some ‘thing’. The same example does not apply to both, although they

both entail the experience of consciousness.

TANTRĀLOKA

entail (the fallacy that consciousness) is insentient. (To which we reply by first

asking,) what is the seeming intention behind this question? (Is it not) whether it

is possible that even when immanent (as all things), there is a form of that

(consciousness) which is uncoloured and separate from it, as are the two horns

(on a) cow’'s (head)? Or (is the view that) by virtue of its freedom, making its
(immanent) form as all things manifest, this nondual consciousness does not fall

from its own essential nature? The first view there is defective. If
(consciousness) were to transcend its own (immanent) nature as all things, it

would not possess the effulgence (sphurattā) (of its Light). This has been said
many times, and he will say (it again in the following verses):

‘The Śiva (that dualists imagine,) who is tranquil, different from

everything else, and transcends all the other paths (of emanation) (and so) is like

(any insentient object such as a) a jar, does not exist anywhere. This

consciousness, which is the Great Light and is (perpetually) expanding,
is

Śiva. (His) Śiva nature (śivatā) itself is His manifestation as all things. Thus,

His union (yoga) with the shining in this way (of the Great Light of
consciousness and its manifestation as all things) unfolds spontaneously
(svarasena).”

sense:

The venerable Tapasvin has also said with the very same intended

‘(Śiva is saying to Śakti): "the original nature (of all things) that I make
manifest (kalayāmi) as this and that at progressively more superior (levels), are
each Your foundations (adhara) (at every higher level of existence). Nor is
there any manifestation (kalanā) where You are not present everywhere, even

though it is lower (adhara) (than these).

Again, according to the second view, although (consciousness) is not

really coloured, it manifests as each particular manifest (lit. ‘coloured’) form

that has poured out (of consciousness) by virtue of its own freedom. Thus, this
too is not its thirteenth form. (To say that it is) would mean that the

manifestation of the two (i.e. the immanent twelve and the transcendental
thirteenth) would be locked in conflict like (two) pieces of iron (clashing
together). When an actor assumes this or that role, although he (continues) in

reality (to be the same) actor, he appears in this and that form, but not as the
actor as well (at the same time). The same is the case with consciousness also.

T As manifestations of the Light of consciousness, the countless entities in the universe

are its effulgence. If the manifestation of the Light as all things were to be separate from
its pure shining, its manifestation in this way would be some separate reality, not its

effulgence. Indeed, the Light would have no effulgence and so, not ilumining anything,
would effectively not shine.

Cf. above, 3/98cd-103ab.

Read vijṛmbhate | ṣā for vijrṛṃmbhate | ṣa. The same consciousness unfolds and

manifests perpetually as both transcendental Śiva and His immanent Śiva nature
manifest as all things.
Below, 15/264cd-266.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Although in reality (it continues) to be pure consciousness alone, when it is
(immanent) as all things, it manifests in (its) twelve-fold form. It does not also

manifest in a thirteenth form as just pure consciousness. Thus, what has been

said is sound. Therefore, manifesting (its immanent) form as all things,
consciousness manifests twelve-fold. Otherwise, on the contrary, it amounts to
being just one (and not also the many). As the scripture (says):
‘To the extent that deities are engaged in their own individual tasks
(performed one after another), the term ‘produced in sequence’ (krama) is
applicable (to them), not otherwise. If everything abides in a state of oneness
within the Inexplicable, then one should know that that is (the condition that) is

non-sequential (akrama), as it is transcendent in all respects.”

(So some may say that,) although there is oneness in this way, it is not

contrary to duality However, that qualification (with regards to

consciousness) is also not possible, for it would be just consciousness alone
(devoid of manifest form). The word ‘alone’ (eva) precludes association with
anything else. And there is nothing else at all here. So how can it be
disassociated (from something else)? The consequence would be that it would
be consciousness in this way that cannot bear that association also. Moreover,
consciousness is the foundation (niṣṟhā) of objectivity, and objectivity, separate
from its own essential nature (whichis consciousness), is nothing at all. Thus,
just as it cannot even be denoted, it cannot be named (in any way) in any
circumstance, and so is proclaimed to be the Nameless (Anāmakā) and the
Inexplicable (Anākhyā). Enough now of much (talk).
Surely (one may ask,) if that is the case, how is it that elsewhere (in

other scriptures), it is right to say that it has a thirteenth (form)? It is not
possible to say that that is not right, because the authority (pramāṇa) (for this
view) is scripture, which (as such) is not subject to contradiction (nirbādha). So
pray tell me, how can one remedy this (problem)? It is said (in response to this
question), that the Māyā perceivers are subject here to duality (bhedādhivāsita)
(and so) are to be instructed accordingly. Thus, just as happens in common
spiritual discipline (samānārthacaryā), the teaching operates in accord with (the
disciple’s) capacity (to grasp it), so that it may develop (in him) easily. Thus, in
terms of duality (bheda), which is (due to) the influence of conceptual thought
(vikalpabala), it is said that consciousness has a thirteenth (form). Here, on

" MS N reads: kramagatā part of a sequence’ for kramakṛtā ‘produced in sequence’.

Read dvayāpratipakṣabhutam for dvayapratipakṣabhutam. Thīs is actually a dualist

view. From a dualist perspective, the oneness of consciousness is preserved by
understanding it to be a separate reality from the objective world, which is its opposite.

If we consider, as Advaita Vedānta does, that the objective world is just the dream of

ignorance, and that all that truly exists is consciousness alone, we are still left with two
distinct realities, although in a different sense.

If consciousness is the oneness of reality, there is no other reality with respect to
which it can be said to be contrary. This means that there would be no objective world
in any sense, even as an illusion.

Thought constructs have the power or ‘strength’ (bala) to generate a sense of duality,

that is, difference and relative distinctions. It is due to this that we conceive a difference

TANTRĀLOKA

the contrary, the teaching is such in relation to nondual (reality), which is truly
existent. Thus, everything is (consistent) and accounted for.

Surely (one may ask,) the twelve-fold dawning of this supreme
consciousness is explained differently here than it was before, by such teachings
(as the following):

‘(Śiva) has just these three powers, namely, (the Goddess) Parā
(Supreme) and the rest (that is, Parāparā (Middling) and Aparā (Lower)). They
manifest in (the phases of) creation, persistence, withdrawal and the Fourth (that

both includes and transcends them). Thus (they) have arisen twelve-fold.”

Thus, (it appears) that there is a contradiction between what was (said)
before and (what was said) subsequently. How is that? It is said here (in
response to this query), that whatever (Abhinavagupta) intended to say concerns
the dawning of the twelve-fold form of supreme consciousness. (Alright,) let it

be so or else not (as you like), because a difference in the modality (in which it
is worshipped and practiced) (prakriyā) (does not entail an essential) difference
in that (teaching concerning the nature of consciousness).”’ Summing up this
(point as) intended (here), he himself has said elsewhere:

‘Each one of those four energies abide three-fold, by virtue of the

freedom (of consciousness), in emanation, persistence, and withdrawal, and so

are twelve.”

between a transcendental, thirteenth form of consciousness and a twelve-fold immanent

aspect.
“ Cf. below, 33/30.

Above, TĀ 1/106cd-107ab (107).
Ṭhe twelve phases of consciousness can be worshipped as Twelve Kaālīs, as taught in
the Krama system (that is, to be more precise, in the form of it Abhinava accepts), or as
the three Trika Goddesses. Both are essentially the same, and so there is no need to
bother about the difference in the outer representation. However, there is a difference
with regards to the modality of the ritual procedure (prakriyā). The former follows that
of Krama ritual and the latter that of Trika. One could call the former kramaprakriyā
and the latter trikaprakriyā (although we do not find these terms being used anywhere).
While the former procedure has been traced in the original Tantras, the latter has not.
This may be due to the loss of Trika Tantras which integrated their Trika procedure with

Krama. We know that such Tantras existed from references Abhinava draws from them.

One striking example is the Devyāyāmala. It is clear that Jayaratha considers both
modalities to be attested by scriptural authority, however, he does not supply any direct
supporting references from the scripture, nor does Abhinava. So it is not impossible that

it may be Abhinava’s own adaptation or that of the author of the Kramastotra who, as
we shall see, Jayaratha regularly quotes to describe each Kālī.

Jayaratha addreṣses this problem again below where he quotes scriptures that
typically teach that there are thirteen Kālīs, although Abhinava says that there are only
twelve. Jayaratha will account for this seeming contradiction by explaining that thirteen
Kaālīs (twelve with one in the centre) are worshipped in the outer ritual procedure —
krama. Here, he explains, Abhinava is concerned with the inner sequence — krama — of
the phases of consciousness to which they correspond. From that perspective, there is no
separate, transcendental thirteenth phase.

ṬSā p. 28-29.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

According to this view, it is said that (consciousness) dawns twelve-fold

in a different modality of practice (prakriyā) also.” Thus, all (that is taught

concerning this matter) is free of contradiction.
Surely (one may then ask), as (consciousness) manifests (in this way)
because such is its nature, then one must inevitably accept that (consciousness)

possesses specific qualities; otherwise it would not be the many (things that are
made manifest by it). So where (in what circumstance)
consciousness qualified)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

and

how

(is

lcieeEiṀ|EeN ĀEextaktf.
JT] JṬGTITRĒTT āāā; gTĀĪTGAI
|| 2ē I
śuddhasaṁvinmayṝī prācye jñāne śabdanarūpiṇī |
karaṇe grahaṇākārā yataḥ śrīyogasañcare || 126 ||

Consciousness is pure in the initial (phase of perception), which (is

nonconceptual) perception (jñāna). (Then in the second phase, which

operates) in (the sphere of) the senses, it is the (inner) discourse (śabdana)

(of conceptual consciousness centred on multiplicity), whose form is

(sensory and mental) perception (grahaṇa). As is (said in the) venerable
Yogasaṅcāra.
One is three times four, and the other is four times three.
The phenomenological, cognitive analysis of these cycles is certainly Abhinava’s
exegesis. This is true also of his presentation of these two aspects of consciousness, a
doctrine which is the mainstay of nondualist Saiva understanding of consciousness. Not
unknown to earlier Krama sources and other texts such as the Vijñūānabhairava, it is
formulated and extensively elaborated for the first time by Somānanda in his Śivadṛṣṭi.

‘l This subject is taken up again in line 146cd, after a long passage drawn from the
Yogasaṅcāratantra. 1 have translated this verse as Jayaratha understands and explains

it. However, it is possible that Jayaratha has misunderstood Abhinava here. Another
translation could be:
‘Consciousness is pure in the initial (phase of perception), which (is
nonconceptual) perception (jñāna), and its form is the resonance (śabdana) (of
reflective awareness). (Then in the second phase, which operates) in (the sphere of) the
senses, its form is (sensory and mental) perception (grahaṇa). As is (said in the)
venerable Yogasaṅcāratantra.”
The concepts and terminology here are drawn from the nondualist Śaivism of
Somānanda and the Pratyabhijñā of his disciple Utpaladeva. They may be implicit in the
teachings of some Tantras, as Abhinava clearly understands to be the case, but they are

not articulated fully in this way. Jayaratha understands that this is said in the
Yogasaṁcara, but there can be no doubt that the reference drawn from the Yogasaṅcāra

begins in the following verses. Here Abhinava is introducing its teachings from the
perspective of these, his exegetical models.

Here again one wonders whether Jayaratha is correct. When the texts refer to

consciousness as ‘pure’, this normally means free of thought constructs (vikalpa). Pure

consciousness is equated with the supreme subject. Supreme subjectivity is not
subjectivity related to objectivity. Indeed, one may ask whether it is ‘subjective’ at all

TANTRĀLOKA

without an object. This is why Abhinavagupta posits the Absolute — Anuttara — as the

supreme state beyond it, at the level of No Means (anupāyāvasthā). Nonetheless,

subjectivity devoid of objectivity is possible according to this view because the power

of reflective awareness is the inherent freedom of consciousness, by virtue of which it is
freely, without constraints or conditions, a subject which is ‘supreme’ precisely because
its ‘object’ is itself, which is not an object. This is the state at the level of the Divine
Means (śāmbhavāsthā). Thīs seems to be what Abhinava is saying here, that is, that in

the initial moment of perception, consciousness is ‘pure’ because the subjectivity with
which perception starts and must exist, according to this view, in order for it to be
possible, is as yet devoid of an object. Thus, it should be free of all objectivity and the
thought constructs which accompany it.
But Jayaratha does not take this view. According to him, the subject at the
moment of perception is contracted to some slight degree, and so although free of
objectivity and hence thought constructs, the cognitive consciousness is a state of

‘contracted nondiscursive cognition’. It would be easy to emend the text from

‘saṁkucita-” — ‘contractedʼ to asaṁkucita- — ‘uncontracted’. However, that would not

square with what was said before, namely, that the perceiver at this stage is ‘contracted’
to some degree, and emendation of the text there also would be problematic.
The problem is the term ‘śabdana’. t is derived from the noun ‘śabda’, which
in its
most common literal sense means ‘word’ or just ‘sound’. Accordingly, the action

noun ‘śabdana’ literally means ‘uttering’, ‘resounding’ or ‘articulating’. In a technical

sense, Jayaratha understands the term here to be the inner ‘utterance’, ‘articulation’ or

‘discourse’ of thought. This a possible interpretation, but I propose that this is not the

one Abhinava intended. In order to understand the issue here, we must briefly explore

the nature and function of language as understood by the Pratyabhijñā and its relation to
consciousness, perception and thought (vikalpa). The starting point is Bhartṛhari, the

great grammarian and philosopher of language, whose views are a major source for the

Pratyabhijñā view. The following two verses are especially central for the Pratyabhijñā:

‘There is no understanding (pratyaya) (of any sort) that is not associated with
Word (śabda). AIl knowledge shines as if permeated by Word (śabda). If Speech (vāc),
the eternal essential nature of consciousness, which is (its) reflective awareness

(pratyavamarśinī), were to abandon it, the light (of consciousness) would not shine.” VP

1/123-124

The Buddhists agree that language permeates mental representations (vikalpa).
But this is not so, they maintain, in the case of a direct knowledge of things, which is
free of conceptualization (nirvikalpa) and hence language. This, they say, is the way

things are known directly in the first moment of perception, before it precipitates down
to conceptualization in the second moment. The Pratyabhijñā agrees with them. Indeed,
it is commonly accepted by all schools of Indian philosophy, including the dualist Śaiva

Siddhānta, that in the first moment of perception there is a direct experience of the

realia their system maintains are ultimate principles. In other words, although the
content of direct experience (anubhava) free of thought constructs (nirvikalpa) differs
from school to school, there is common agreement that it is ultimately veridical, not just
provisionally so, as is the case in the second moment of conceptualization of the

contents of the first. The Pratyabhijñā agrees with the Buddhist idealists, who
formulated this view that the thought constructs of the second moment are a kind of
inner mental discourse of the sort ‘this is a jar, ‘that is a cloth not a jar, ‘I remember
the jar, or ‘ḹ imagine a jar and so on.

utterance — śahdana — going on within nondiscursive consciousness. Prior (and hence


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


superior) to the operation of the mind, it is not mental discourse. It is the self-reflective
awareness (vimarśa) which shines as all things and makes them manifest as its own
essential, supremely real (paramārthika) nature. The Pratyabhijñā maintains that this

self-awareness consciousness has of itself as ‘I amʼ is the supreme level of speech
(parāvāc). Obviously, it is not audible, as is Corporeal Speech, nor is it based on a
linguistic convention (sarketa). Nor is it heard inwardly as thoughts, as is the Middle

level of Speech. Nor does it have any object — even of itself as everything, as does the

Speech of Vision (paśyantī). Nonetheless the Pratyabhijñā refers to it as ‘utterance’ —

Śśabdana. Not surprisingly, this is a shocking and most distasteful view for the
Buddhiṣts. Enlightenment is the removal of all sense of ‘I’, which is just a notion
(vikalpa) and hence false. To be free of thought and for reality to appear just as it is, is
to be free of language. Utpaladeva counters this view by saying that a notion is always
formed, as the Buddhists themselves say, on the basis of a counter-correlate, and there is
none such with respect to this pure self-awareness of the one reality which is
consciousness. Moreover, he declares, building on Bhartṛhari:

‘(The power of) consciousness (citi) is reflective awareness. It is Supreme
Speech that arises spontaneously. That is the (supreme) primary (mukhya) freedom and
sovereignty of the Supreme Self.’ IP 1/5/13
Abhinava comments (IP√ 1, p 205): “Reflective awareness is (a kind of)
utterance (śabdana), the nature of which is an inner discourse (antarabhilāpa) (within
consciousness), and that utterance is independent of (linguistic) conventions, like the
(silent) inner indication (of something made by a) nod of the head. Its nature is
uninterrupted (and unconditioned) wonder, and it is the (very) life of conventional,
phenomenal words made of letters. (t is such) because it is the inner foundation of the
(surface forms of) reflective awareness such as ‘this is blue’ and ‘I am Caitra’. It is
‘supreme’ because it is full (complete and perfect). It is ‘speech’ because it says and
denies everything by reflecting (on it).’
In the initial phase of perception, pure consciousness is supreme,
transcendental and absolute subjectivity (parapramātṛbhāva), which is devoid of
thought constructs. In the second phase of perception, consciousness is in the lower,
immanent state of subjectivity of conceptually conditioned consciousness formed
through the thought constructs of the individual perceiver engaged in perceiving its

object through the activity of the senses. In this phase, it is engaged in perceiving and
conceptualizing objects of perception through the activity of the senses and mind. Thus,
there are two forms of cognition. One is the knowledge we have of the one universal
reality and the other that of specific things, whether outer physical or inner mental ones.
The first is cognition free of mental representation (avikalpakaṁ jñānam). t īs the basis

and source of the other one, which is either directly or indirectly rooted in it. The first is
direct experience (anubhava). It arises within the individual perceiving subjectivity, and
so is ‘contracted’ to a degree; nonetheless, it is pure consciousness, which is
uncontaminated by an object outside itself. This is because the object is still one with it,
as is the case in the higher principle of Sadāśiva, where the experience is one of identity,
of the form ‘I am this’. Above it is the pure reflective awareness of the transcendental

Śiva priṇciple, which is totally devoid of objectivity, as ‘I am’. Below is the principle of

Īśvara, in which objectivity is mixed in with the subjective reflective awareness of ‘, in
the experience of ‘this am Iʼ’. The ‘I’ of the experience of ‘ am this’ is still detached
from the ideal objectivity shining within it, it is not ‘mixed in’ with it. At this level, the
object — ‘this’- is universal (sāmānya) objectivity-as-such with no specific form. It
cannot serve any function or purpose on the plane of daily life, which operates in the

TANTRĀLOKA

This supreme consciousness is pure ‘in the initial (phase of
perception)ʼ, that is, within the perceiver, because even though contraction
does arise to some extent, (consciousness in this phase) is the perceiver (and not
the object, which is completely conditioned and an object of thought). This

consciousness is not impure, as (it is when it is in the form) of the means of
knowledge and the rest, and its nature is the most contracted (form of)

conceptual knowledge. (In the sphere) of the means of knowledge, that is, (in
the sphere of) the senses and the rest, (consciousness is in the form of) ‘(inner)

discourse) (śabdana) which is discursive mental representation (vikalpa). The
meaning is that it is the reflective awareness of the difference (between

individual entities and the perceiver). Therefore, it is said that its ‘form is
(sensory and mental) perception’ (grahaṇa), and that depends on both the
(individual) perceiver and object of perception.
Surely (one may ask,) what is the authority here (to support the view)
that it is supreme consciousness itself which is present on the level of the means
of knowledge also in the form of (sensory and mental) perception? With this
doubt in mind, he says: ‘as is (said in the) venerable Yogasañcaratantra’ in

the passage about to be quoted.” That says:

A Yoga from the Yogasaṁcāra

3 ar̥d ī̃ Jca maaR |
TĨ̄TIT ZIGTR TTS TJRṬTTḤ I 2N I
ye cakṣurmaṇḍale śvete pratyakṣe parameśvarīi |
soḍaśāraṁ dvādaśāraṁ tatrasthaṁ cakram uttamam || 127 I|
‘O Supreme Goddess, the two white, visible circles of the eyes are

(the wheel) of sixteen spokes. The best of Wheels, consisting of twelve

spokes is located there.

sphere of the second form of cognition that develops after it, when consciousness
operates through the senses. Through them it perceives individual entities, each

according to their own specific characteristics (svalakṣaṇa), the knowledge of which

makes daily life possible.

2 4/127 to 144 is drawn from the Yogasaṁcāra. See note ad 4/144 concerning
Abhinava’s method. Note that Jayaratha does not quote the original verses, as he would
were he to have had access to the text.

Deities and metaphysical principles are commonly projected onto the body. Special

attention is normally given to the head. An early example of the projection of deities in
parts of the eyes is found in the Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣad, where we read:

‘He who knows the calf and its abode, its special resort, its post and its tether,
kills his seven envious kinsmen [the eyes, ears, nostrils and mouth]. The vital force in
the body is indeed the calf; this body is its abode, the head is its special resort, strength
its post, and food its tether. These seven gods that prevent decay worship [the vital
force]. Through these pink lines in the eye Rudra attends on it; through the water that is
in the eye, Parjanya; through the pupil, the sun; through the dark portion, fire; through
the white portion, Indra; through the lower eyelid, the earth attends on it; and through


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

‘“The two’ are in the dual number, in relation to the two (eye)balls, one

should understand the same further ahead also (and relate what is said to both

eyes). ‘The two white circles of the (two) eyes’ can be seen. They are

‘yisible and are seen, not like the red circles (around the eyeballs) that are
hidden (under the eyelids). The sixteen-spoked wheel, located there (in the

white circles), is most excellent as it encompasses all things, because each (of
the four) — object, means, subject and (resulting) knowledge, are of the nature of
all the others. The meaning is that it manifests in that form.
It is (said) with that same intended sense in the venerable
Kramasadbhāva that there are said to be sixteen goddesses that should be
worshipped in the Wheel of the Inexplicable. As is said there in a passage
beginning with:
‘Next, O Hara, listen attentively to a brief (account of) the sixteen

(goddesses)” And ending with: ‘The Kālī Whose being dissolves away is said to

have sixteen parts (kalā).

the upper eyelid, heaven. He who knows it as such never has any decrease of food.”
BrUp 2/2/1-2 (translation by Mādhavānanda).

Although one would expect a similar symbolism in the Nerratantra (the Tantra

of (Śiva’s Third) Eye), in actual fact the ‘“Eye’ meant there is the mantra (orṁ juṁ saḥ)
(see below, 30/40cd-41ab), which corresponds to this limb (vidyāṅga) of the Mantra

body of the deity. Nonetheless, Ksemarāja, applying his usual hermeneutics, implants
what he, like his teacher Abhinava, considered to be the higher esoteric teachings of the
Krama into the Netratantra, by seeing them secretly revealed in Śiva's Third Eye, just as
they are in the Yogasaṁcāra. Thuṣ, as Sanderson (2006: 55) explains: ‘at the end of his

commentary on the Netratantra, Kṣemarāja reveals the esoteric nature of the Eye

(netram), which gives the deity of the Tantra (Netranāth, Lord of the Eye [-mantra]) and

the Tantra itself their name:

Victorious is the unique Eye (netram) of Śiva. 1) It is white [in part] with a
radiance that is innate, since it bestows the light [of reality] on everything (ābhāsanam).
2) It is red [in part] because it immerses itself in the awareness of whatever it manifests
(āmarśanām). 3) It is grey [in part] because it internalizes all that [manifestation] in
[subjective] relish (saṁīarvaṇam). 4) It is black [in part] because it devours [even] that
[subjective awareness] (grāsaḥ). 5) It is neither white nor black nor grey nor red nor not
these, since it is the unity embodied in the Circle of Absolute Light (bhāsacakram).
(NTu 2 p. 343)
See Sanderson (2006: 56) for a comparative table of components of this

sequence with the one in the Yogasaṅcāra, and in the MP. (2 Tri) (9/4-11/3) and MM
(39-40). Cf. also PrHṛ 11 and above, note 3,797 for other similar Krama sequences.

‘“ Add te pratyakṣe between dṛsśyete and dṛśyamāne.

“ Theṣe lines cannot be traced in the extant manuscript of the Kramasadbhāva.
Although this may be because it is incomplete, it is not likely that it was originally there,

as fragments in the Kramasadbhāva that have been recovered state that this Wheel

consists of seventeen Kālīs, not sixteen. Indeed, Jayaratha himself quotes the
Kramasadbhāva, where it says this (see below TĀv ad 4/173ab and note). However, the
discrepancy may only be apparent. The Kālīs are also said in the sources to be in a
Wheel of Twelve Kālīs, but there are thirteen, counting the one in the centre. The same

TANTRĀLOKA

Although (the Wheel) here is the Inexplicable (Anākhya), the object of

knowledge, which (corresponds to the process of) emanation, predominates, and
so as it is the Moon (of objectivity), it is white.
Surely (one may ask,) if the sixteen-spoked wheel is located here, how

can the twelve-spoked wheel (be here) also? With this doubt in mind, he says:

fitá mea 2 3 Jvmīd & Vs | 22¢ 1
āa-āā fkṝr yrag ftrāīzrrgrrī

f 1 22x 1
ftzgīaā fkr ā 7 - š wāaf |

prativāraṇavad rakte tadbahir ye tad ucyate |
dvitīyaṁ madhyage ye te kṛṣṇaśvete ca maṇḍale || 128 I|
tadantar ye sthite śuddhe bhinnāñjanasamaprabhe |
caturdale tu te jñeye agnīṣomātmake priye || 129 ||
mithunatve sthite ye ca cakre dve parameśvari |
saṁmīḷaṉonmīḷaṉaṁ te anyonyaṁ vidadhātake || 130 ||

may be the case here. The spokes of this wheel of Kālī are sixteen, but the Kālīs are
seventeen. Jayaratha did not have access to the Yogasaṁcāra (see below), so this
reference cannot be from there.
4/127 to 144 is drawn from the Yogasaṁcāra. (See note ad 4/144). Elsewhere
in his exposition, Jayaratha does not quote the original verses, as he would were he to
have had access to the text. Moreover, it appears that Jayaratha may not have
understood every detail correctly. Thus, observe possible errors or, at least, uncertainties

in Jayaratha’s interpretation. See, for example, the multiple problems with his

explanation of 4/135-136ab. Even Gnoli, who generally follows Jayaratha, is perplexed

here by what he says.

The circles symbolize the subject (pramātṛ), means (pramāṇa), and object of
knowledge (prameya), with the fourth as the Inexplicable, which is the one all-

encompassing pure noetic (pramā) consciousness. These identifications are certainly
Abhinava’s exegesis. The Krama are idealists, teaching that the one reality is the

goddess who is dynamic cognitive consciousness. Accordingly, there are references to
subject and object and their essential oneness. However, the terms there for them are
bhokṭṛ and bhogya. There is no evidence that the primary texts had elaborated this triad
of subject (pramātṛ), means (pramāṇa), and object of knowledge (prameya). This

terminology is typical of Mīmāṁsaka cognitive theories and epistemology. Thus,
although the Mīmāṁsa is not nondualist, it appears that that they have been drawn from

there. The common point of contact is the phenomenology of the Mīmārṁsa, that affirms

that whatever can be named is real within its own contextual parameters. Thus, for
example, if we can say ‘the rabbit has horns’, the Mīmāṁṣa would maintain that such a
rabbit exists, albeit in an imaginary form. Perception is the tying together, as it were, of
the three polarities — trikiūṭa — of subject, means and object of knowledge, all three of
which must be real for perception to be possible, irrespective of whether it is veridical or

not.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


That second one is said to be the two red (circles of twelve spokes),

which are like enclosures, outside that (wheel of sixteen spokes). In (the iris
of each eye,) between (the black pupils and the white circles of the two
eyes,) there are two (other) Wheels (of the two eyes), which are (partially)
black and (partially) white (and have eight spokes each). One should know
that within them (in the pupils) there are two (other) pure circles, (their)

colour like that of (freshly) sliced black collyrium, with four spokes (each).
O beloved, the two (subject and object, the male and female
partners,) abide (united) as a couple in the two Wheels of the Fire and
Moon (of eight and sixteen spokes, respectively). O Supreme Goddess, they
expand and contract one another (when the yogi and yoginī are engaged in

union). (128-130)

“ The dynamic meditative practice drawn from the Yogasaṅcāratantra begun in verse

127 continues up to verse 144. It is presented by Abhinavagupta as an explanation of
how the four processes of emanation, persistence, withdrawal and the Inexplicable, in
the three domains of subject, means and object of knowledge, operate in relation to the

senses (see below 4/145). Thus, he says, it illustrates how consciousness appears to

manifest phenomena, that is, the psychophysical organism and the outer world, as
separate from itself. Moreover, Abhinava tells us that it is a secret practice (4/146ab),
which Jayaratha clearly says is a yogic sexual practice (caryākrama) which, because it
is secret, one should understand for oneself (TAv ad 4/144), and this we will try to do,

encouraged by his declaration that it is also ‘very clear’.

There are five phases in this creative meditation. Each phase is marked by a

descent of a stream of supreme consciousness, characterized as the ‘nectar’ that emerges
from the Moon of objectivized consciousness (the female polarity) heated by the Fire of
subjectivity (the male polarity). It rains down from its own objectivized energies,
generating and subjectivizing the spheres of the phases of perception and the physical
body. This is followed by an ascent. Each ascent is an opportunity to enter and become

one with supreme liberated consciousness. Then the next phase follows.

The First Phase (verses 128-132). The Pulse of Subject and Object in the Night and
the Ascent into the Thousand Spoked Wheel.

The First Ascent.

1) The first phase commences with an ascent that takes place in the dark Night of Māyā,

the sphere of duality. The Fire of the subject that shines in the male partner engaged in

union unites there with the Moon of objectivity that shines in the female partner.

‘Pressing’ one another together, they exude ‘nectar’, which Jayaratha explains is ‘the
supreme principle of consciousnessʼ. This is the blissful energy of the flux of emission
(visarga), represented by the seventeenth digit of the Moon (see above note 1,23).

Union first takes place in consciousness, as both partners experience each other and
themselves as the subjective and objective polarities of the one universal consciousness.
The cycle of perception - the stages of which are marked by the Twelve Kālīs — flows
through the two polarities, out from one partner to the other and back. Moving out from
one subjectivity, it contracts as objectivity expands. As it returns, swinging back,

objectivity contracts and subjectivity expands. Expansion and contraction in the male
polarity is complemented by the reverse in the female and vice versa, back and forth, in
and out. Thus, the two ‘squeeze’ and rub against each other, full of the sacred awareness
of the divine energies of the Kālīs in each moment and phase of perception, in the

TANTRĀLOKA

course of this dynamic, pulsing union. By their union, the Tantra teaches, they ‘exude
nectar˚. (128-132ab)

2) In this way, a vision of the Light of the Supreme Perceiver dawns in the dark night of
Māyā, ‘ʻabove’ the two wheels of subject and object. The Thousand Spoked Wheel of
the cosmic manifestation of consciousness within consciousness shines within it.
(132cd)

The Second Phase (133-137ab). The Generation of the Individual Soul.

The First Descent

3) After this first initial ascent, if liberation is not achieved in the Thousand Spoked
Wheel, a new creation takes place at the individual level. The Egg of Brahmā, that
ranges from the principle of Śakti to Earth, is generated from the Wheel of a Thousand

Spokes within the transcendental Śiva principle.
4) Descending from there, the objectivity of the Egg, which is the Moon, is melted by
the Fire of subjectivity rising from the female partner, and the lunar nectar, which is the

essence of individual subjective consciousness, pours out of it. Thus, the initial
universal objective creation that emerges from transcendental Śiva becomes the
individual subjective creation. Now at the individual embodied level it completely fills
the wheels (that is, spheres and cycles,) of consciousness with the blissful lunar energy

of emission, and then the senses, down to the gross elements that constitute the body. In
this way, as Jayaratha says, the Supreme Lord first manifests the ‘contracted’ i.e.
individual forms of subjectivity, and then the rest, down to the physical body formed
from the gross elements.

5) As in the first phase, liberation can be achieved without proceeding further. Even in
this gross individual form, everything can be withdrawn back into unconditioned,

liberated, disembodied consciousness by the resonance (nāda) of the self-reflective
awareness of individual consciousness of its Śiva nature.
6) Īf this liberating withdrawal does not take place, the process continues into the
following phase. And so, as before, the nectar of the emission of consciousness that
streams out of objectified consciousness transports the presence of the unchanging and
pervasive Deity down into the confines of the physical body consisting of the five gross

elements, where it is subject to its changes. There it travels down with force into the
genitals, where the universe is generated by the outer emission (visarga) of
consciousness and dissolves away into it. The recognition that this is all the activity of
consciousness is the third occasion to attain liberation and accomplishment (siddhi).

(137cd-139)

The Second Ascent
7) Now, having descended this way into outer embodied subjectivity, the Lord again
travels up from there by the practice of Brahmacaryā, which in common parlance means
‘continence’ (see below, note to TĀv ad 4/139). Here it means the ‘conduct (caryā) of

bliss (the Brahman = bliss). Coupled with yogic practice, this leads the vital seed up

into the infinite, unconditioned plane of Brahmā. There, by the union of subject and

object at this level, the upper emission takes place internally from the individual Self
within the universal Self.

The Third Phase (141-143)
The Second Descent and Third Ascent


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


“’“The two red circles’ (of the two eyes hidden by the eyelids)

‘outside’ the white circles are ‘like enclosuresʼ, that is, (are present there) like
surrounding circles. ‘That is said to be the second one’, namely, the wheel of
twelve spokes consisting of the (Twelve Kālīs), beginning with the venerable

Sṛṣṭikāll.' Although the state here is that of the Inexplicable, the means of

knowledge, which corresponds to persistence, predominates. It is red, coloured
8) Unretained, the Moon of objectivity has not flown upwards, and so, still in the
genitals and heated by the passionate Fire of subjectivity, objectivized consciousness

melts and flows down progressively through the legs into the Wheel of Five Spokes,
that is, the body made of the five gross elements and the other wheels. The entire

process is then repeated progressively in all the senses.
9) Now at the final, grossest embodied level, the last ascent of the Fire of embodied
subjectivity takes place through the body, now fully formed this way, from the toe — the

lowest extremity — to the Cavity of Brahmā — the highest extremity at the top of the
head. (143ca).
One wonders where Jayaratha got the details of his explanation of the contents of the
cakras. Abhinava quotes the Yogasaṅcāra in several places, Jayaratha nowhere presents
the original source. So he most probably did not have access to it. If so, how can he

supply so many details? It seems unlikely that he invented them. He most likely
received them from a predecessor. Perhaps from an earlier commentary or an oral

explanation he received from his teacher. Certainly, the details appear to be quite
plausible. Even so, an analysis of the text Abhinava supplies does not entirely agree, it
seems to me, with Jayaratha’s explanation. The reader is referred to my notes for the
details. Swami Lakṣhmanjoo supplies yet another explanation.

At the same time, there are also a good number of details that appear to be
consistent with what we know about the YS from other references. Of central
importance is the identification of the YS as a Trika Tantra that integrated into its Trika
teachings those of the Kālī Krama, as did others, notably the Devyāyāmala. There is

substantial evidence for this (see Appendix concerning the cited texts under the heading
‘Yogasaṅcāra’). Here the association with the Krama is obvious in the symbolism of
the eyes of the goddess, with the twelve Kaālīs in the outer red enclosure of the eyes.
Thus here also, according to Jayaratha, the YS maintains that in the iris the lotus of four
petals comprises the three Trika goddesses along with Mātṛsadbhāva, who is identified
with Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, the Kālī who is the supreme goddess of the Krama system, just as
we find in the Devyāyāmala.

“ The wheel of twelve spokes is mentioned after that of sixteen spokes mentioned in

the previous verse, which is one of the reasons why it is referred to here as ‘the second

oneʼ. One would expect the wheel of sixteen spokes to come first, followed by the other
three, each of which has four spokes less, progressively. However, that would
contravene the commonly accepted equation of white with the Moon, which is
universally accepted as representing the object, and consists of sixteen parts. Moreover,

and above all, it would go against a deeper logic at work here. We shall see that the
wheel of the twelve Kaālīs, which is that of the cycle of the means of knowledge

(pramāṇa), contains within itself the other cycles of the object, subject and resultant
noetic consciousness, which are represented by the succeeding circles. It is thus
appropriate that it should encompass them, although it is the second wheel, after that of

the object. Again, without the intervening means of knowledge, the object, located in
the white circle of the eye, and subject, located in the iris, would be next to each other

and directly connected. Even so, they are intimately related. Thus, as the dark iris

expands, the white circle of the eye contracts and vice versa, symbolically representing
the dynamic relationship between subject and object expressed here.

TANTRĀLOKA

by the object (prameya). Thus, because the object abides at one with it, the

group of four associated with it does not exist separately, and so (this wheel has

only) twelve spokes. Moreover, it is located on the outside because it includes

the object."

’ Read a break () between dvādaśāratvam and ata and then another between —sthānarṅ

and madhyage. We will see that all these spheres of the cycles (‘wheels’) of

consciousness are contained in that of the means of knowledge, which is the Wheel of
the Twelve Kālīs, through which they can all be experienced. Then the cycle of
perception (i.e the means of knowledge) is experienced as the cycle of the Inexplicable.
Recognizing consciousness to be the dynamism of this universal pulsation
(sāmānyaspanda), which is ‘inexplicable’ because it cannot be described as either
successive, non-successive, both or neither, is to recognize the true nature of the Self,
which is liberation itself. Swami Lakshmanjoo in his Kramanayapradīpikā (p. 13-16)
explains the four categories of Kālī’s expanded cosmic form, that is, the Twelve Kālīs,

as follows.

‘1) Noetic consciousness (pramiti). This is also said to be the category of the
perceiver (pramātṛ), which is beyond the state of the individual subject (grāhaka) and
object (grāhya). At the same time, it is the state of consciousness corresponding to the
experience: ‘T have known this entity°. Thus, in accord with this aspect, it abides in the

state which is the fruit of the means of knowledge. This state is free of the disturbance
of subject and object and manifests solely in its own nature free of the limiting

conditions brought about by the object of knowledge. From another point of view, this
state is the first sprout of the cosmic form (of consciousness). In this state, the perceiver
abides completely merged in noetic consciousness (pramā). This category of noetic

consciousness is said to be the Wheel with four petals, because all four Wheels
described next are considered to be within it. They are the three Goddesses and

Maātr̥sadbhāva. The purpose of saying that Mātrṛsadbhāva (is also present here) is that the
aforementioned three goddesses, Parā and the rest, are present there as energies.
However, along with them, the supreme perceiver, that is, Śiva, assuming the form of
energy (śakti), is present (there with them also). In this state, Śiva does not unfold as the
powerholder, that is, as Śiva. This is why the category of noetic consciousness which is

the four-petalled wheel is also said to be the nature of the Inexplicable (anākhyarūpa).
2) When the category of perceivers unfolds in the gross sphere of the cosmic nature (of
consciousness), then as it progresses it unfolds from the category of noetic
consciousness onwards. It is for this reason that the energies (kalā) of the subsequent
categories increase with respect to the previous ones. All the perceivers in this category
of perceivers experience worldly experiences in the form of sound, touch, form, taste
and smell. This category of perceivers is considered to be the form of Fire. It is also said
(in the Tantrāloka 3/124ab (123cd)): ʻThe supreme principle of Fire is indeed that of the
subject. In other words, that which is considered to be the (true essential nature) of Fire
is also considered to be that of the perceiver. Thus, Fire and the perceiver are not even
slightly different. From the point of view of (its) energies (kalā), Fire is considered to

have eight energies. These same eight energies are considered to be those of the
perceiver as well.
The category of noetic consciousness (pramiti) is also called the Wheel of the
Inexplicable. The four parts (kalā) of that are incorporated into the category of the

perceivers, that is, the three goddesses along with Kuleśvar (who is the form of
Mātṛsadbhāva here). The four new energies are the three Bhairavas of the corresponding
goddesses, namely. Para, Parāpara and Apara Bhairava, along with Kuleśvara.

3) The category of the means of knowledge includes all the senses, which are formed
(from consciousness) as a means to experience the worldly experience (bhoga) of sound
and the rest associated with the phenomenal universe. They are twelve — namely, the


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


five cognitive organs of sense, five of action, along with the mind and intellect. These
are considered to be solar. It is said that the Śun is said to be the means of knowledge.

Theṣe energies are considered to be primarily those of persistence (sthiti) because their
inner and external nature is constantly filled with expanding consciousness. The four

energies of noetic consciousness and the perceiver are combined within the Wheel of
persistence of the category of the means of knowledge. Thus, by adding the (four)
energies of this form, there are twelve altogether. These are as follows:
1) The four energies of the category of noetic consciousness (i.e. the Wheel of the
Inexplicable), namely, the three unmanifest (avyakta) goddesses and Mātrṛsadbhāva.

2) The four energies of the category of perceivers (i.e. the Wheel of Withdrawal),

namely, the three Bhairavas and Kuleśvara.
3) The four energies of the category of the means of knowledge (i.e the Wheel of
Persistence), namely, the three manifest-cum-unmanifest goddesses and Mātṛṣadbhāva.

Added together they make twelve energies. Thus, this Wheel of Persistence, which is

that of the category of the means of knowledge, is called the Wheel with Twelve
Spokes.
4) AIl the types of objects of perception, that is, sound and touch etc., are found and
included in the fourth category, which is that of the objects of knowledge. The perceiver
relishes sound and the rest of the objects of sense on the plane of the means of
knowledge. This category of the objects of knowledge is considered to have a lunar
nature . . . because the energies of the Moon are said to be sixteen, as are those of the
object of knowledge. When (the goddess of consciousness) abides in this form, and the

expansion of the sixteen energies of the object of knowledge has reached its final end,
she completes the outer expansion (of consciousness into objectivity). Thus, as this is

the extreme limit of the unfolding of emanation, this plane of the object of knowledge is
considered to be predominantly emanation. The four energies of noetic consciousness,

the perceiver and the means of knowledge, also unfold within this category of the object

of knowledge. Apart from these twelve energies, the four energies associated with the
category of the object of knowledge, namely, the three manifest goddesses and
Mātṛṣadbhāva, also emerge (here). Thus, there are sixteen energies in this category of
the object of knowledge, that is, the Wheel of Emanation, and it is also called the Wheel
with Sixteen Spokes.
Observing how the energies are more or less in this way, the reader should not
think that there is any difference in any way in their real essential nature. This is
because in reality the nature of these three categories is (essentially) one. The only small

difference is just that in the category of noetic consciousness the energies are

unmanifest (avyakta), in the category of the means of knowledge manifest-cumunmanifest and in that of the objects of knowledge they are considered to be manifest.

The categories of the perceivers are not counted amongst these three because it is not
(like them) predominately energy (śakti), and so the four energies of the category of the

perceivers, namely, the three Bhairavas and Kuleśvara, are said to be male.
All these four configurations are experienced in the oneness of consciousness,

which is the state of the Inexplicable (Anākhyā). It is the experience of each one in a

state of pure noetic consciousness (pramitibhāva). This is how they are when their true
nature as such is realised directly. In this state of consciousness, its domains and phases
are experienced as a progression (krama) in which the prior is merged into the latter,
decreasing, step by step, by four units (kalā) at a time. The first group of four of the
sixteen-spoked Wheel of objectivity realised to be the Inexplicable merges into the

twelve-spoked Wheel of the means of knowledge. The four units that merge in this way
represent the essential objectivity of that sphere at one with the Inexplicable. Similarly,

the eight-spoked Wheel of the subject is formed by merger of the four energies that
constitute the essential state of the means of knowledge when that is realised to be the

TANTRĀLOKA

Inexplicable. Finally, when this dissolves into the four-spoked Wheel of the
Inexplicable, which is the resultant pure noetic consciousness (pramiti), the essence of
its subjectivity merges into it. The four units (kalā) of the Wheel of the Inexplicable

correspond to all four Wheels as one pure noetic consciousness. Although the previous
phases also unfold within that state, here this is fully realised to be so.”

Questions may arise concerning how this process operates and the status of the

groups of four that are lost and those that remain. For example, what is the difference

between the objectivity in the twelve-spoked wheel and in the sixteen-spoked one, or the
means of knowledge in the subject and the subject in the Inexplicable? Even if the

Yogasaṁcāra were still available, one would not find the answer there. The question

arises in the perspective of Abhinavagupta’s phenomenological hermeneutics, and so
the answer is found in the logic of how that operates. The manner in which the
quaternity of the object and the rest abide at one with consciousness in the four-spoked

Wheel is as the triadic goddess of the Trika and the Goddess of the Krama, as aspects of
the Inexplicable (Anākhyā). In this sense, all the Wheels are those of Anākhyā, but not

yet recognised to be such. When the sphere of objectivity is recognised to be a form of
the means of knowledge, its three units are absorbed into the Inexplicable (Anākhyā) of
that phase. In the same way, those of the means of knowledge are absorbed in the

subject, and then finally those of the subject into Anākhyā directly. This is how the four

deities of the fourth wheel are the Inexplicable (Anākhyā) form of the others and

Inexplicable itself. The objectivity that remains in the Wheel of twelve spokes, like the

means of knowledge in the Wheel of subjectivity, are there in their Inexplicable

(Anākhyā) aspect.

As we shall see in detail, the Kālīs are arranged in three groups of four. These
correspond to the object, means of knowledge and the subject, each of which is four-

fold as they are emanated, persist, withdrawn, and even as they abide in a fourth
Inexplicable state which encompasses them but cannot be defined as any one of them.

The culmination of each of the three phases is the Inexplicable, which remains at the
end as the completion of the three cycles. As it is, this Wheel that contains the others

and leads to the realisation of the Inexplicable, which is consciousness itself, it is the
focus of practice. Thus, the Wheel of the Twelve Kālīs, like the Wheel of the
Inexplicable, also is understood to contain the others. Abhinava reiterates several times
that all the ‘wheelsʼ, i.e. cycles and configurations, of the energies of consciousness are

contained in the wheel of the Twelve Kālīs, which is accordingly identified directly at

times with the Wheel of the Inexplicable.
They are distinguished in the domain of practice. The phases of the dynamism
(‘rotation’) of the twelve marks the development of the full realisation of the

Inexplicable state. The goal is the recognition that the dynamism of individual

perception — the ‘means of knowledge’ — is one with the dynamism of universal noetic

consciousness. The Wheel of the Twelve Kaālīs is the initial point of entry into the
Inexplicable, which is its final state. The initial condition is beset with thought

constructs, and so operates in the domain of relative distinction between ‘prior’ and
‘subsequent’, and so is set in time. The final condition is the recognition that the
dynamism of the Inexplicable is free of these distinctions, and hence not a temporal
process. Attention to the sequence of the Twelve Kālīs purifies thought by the

experience of the Inexplicable which, progressively strengthened in all three domains of
the objectivity, perception and subjectivity, consumes them. As all four are explicitly
present in the Wheel of the Twelve Kālīs, this is the one that leads directly to the
recognition of Anākhyā consciousness because, as Jayaratha explains, both subject and

object are present in the means of knowledge as its essential polarities. Again, the pure

noetic state of the Inexplicable is the direct development of the means of knowledge
(see above, comm. 4/123cd-124). The former is the universal activity of consciousness


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


(The third circle is the iris, which is) ‘in between’ the white and black
circles. Thus, because it is coloured by the black circle (of the pupil), which is
on the inside, and the white one (of the eyeball) on the outside, the two circles
(of the iris, one in each eye), are ‘(partially) white and (partially) blackʼ, that

is, grey-like (dhūsara)." These two circles (represent) the state of rest of the
means of knowledge within the subject, and so, although the group of four is
present in it, because it does not exist separately (independently), it is said to be
the eight-spoked Wheel, which is predominantly the perceiver, who corresponds
to withdrawal, and consists of the three Bhairavas, the three goddesses (Parā,
Parāparā and Aparā, who are their consorts), Kuleśvara and Kuleśvarī. This is
what the meaning (of this verse) amounts to. As he will say:
‘Now (next), the Moon rains down in this way (evaṁ) (its) most

excellent nectar everywhere and in every way progressively (krameṇa) into the
eight spokes (of the Wheel of Fire), along with the two Wheels of sixteen and

twelve spokes.”

The two very black™ (circles, i.e. the pupils of the two eyes), within the

(partially) black and (partially) white circle, are called ‘Kumārikā’." Where

(sāmānyaspanda), of which the latter is the particular form (viśeṣaspanda), operating
with respect to a specific perceiver in relation to a specific object. In this perspective,

the process is one of recognizing the essential identity of the particular and the
universal. Each act of perception is the entire activity of consciousness, on the basis of
the fundamental principle which governs the expansion of consciousness, namely, the
recognition that every single thing is everything (sarvaṁ sarvātmakam) and vice versa.

Thus, the Mālinīvijayavārtika declares:

eko bhāvaḥ sarvabhāvasvabhāvaḥ sarve bhāvā ekabhāvasvabhāvāḥ |
arhadvādaḥ so ʻyaṃ asmatsudṛṣṭau yuktaś ca śrīṣāraśāstre pi coktaḥ ||
‘The nature of one thing is everything and the nature of all things is one thing.
This venerable teaching (arhadvāda) fits well in our own good doctrine, it is reasonable
(yukta) also, and taught in the venerable Trikasāra.’ 1/641
Also
tathā hi paripūrṇo ʻsau sarvasarvātmarūpadhṛt |

‘In this way, He is completely full (unconditioned and perfect), bearing the

nature which is that everything is all things.’ (Ibid. 1/820cd)

! The red circle of the twelve Kālīs, representing the means of knowledge, is located
outside the white circle of the Moon of the object, because it includes and thus
encompasses it.

‘!l RṞead a break (l) between dhūsaraprāye and ye.

! Below, 4/135. Another, translation could be: “From the two Wheels of sixteen and
twelve spokes (the Moon rains down in this way the supreme nectar everywhere) in all
respects within the eight spokes.” See note ad loc.

! RṞead atīvakṛṣṇe for atīva

TANTRĀLOKA

these two circles are located is known as the (Wheel) with four petals, because
the subject also rests (there) in (pure) noetic (consciousness) (pramā). The three

goddesses (Parā, Parāparā and Aparā) (are there), along with Mātrṛsadbhāva.
The meaning is that it shines radiantly as the Wheel of the Inexplicable
(i.e. Mātṛsadbhāva), which is just (pure) noetic consciousness alone

(pramāmātra) and its essential nature. Thus, the blackness here (of the pupil

symbolizes this state of consciousness,) because it withdraws everything, and

because, as undivided, its form is the darkness (tamas) (of the unmanifest state).
It is taught that in (its) form with (specific) fixed parts

(pratiniyatāvayava-rupatvena), it is located (and arranged) within the eye in this

way, as the four-fold process of emanation, (persistence, withdrawal, and the

fourth encompassing state of the Inexplicable beyond them)." He describes its
consequent nature there (in that case) also, (with the words) ‘Fire and Moon’

etc. Out of these four wheels, the two wheels of the Fire and Moon, consisting

of eight and sixteen spokes of the subject and object (respectively), ‘abide
(united) as a coupleʼ, as both the enjoyer (bhoktṛ) and the enjoyed (bhogya).

‘They expand and contract one another’ mutually, that is, they (both) make

(each other) expand and contract. This is the meaning. The subject contracting
into itself, makes the object expand, and as the object is made to contract, it
expands itself. The object also (behaves, conversely,) in the same way. This is
the meaning of the statement that ‘(they expand and contract) one another°.
Moreover, that is said to be the state of emanation and withdrawal.

Without the development of the means of knowledge, the object would not
come to rest in the subject. Thus, persistence is also implied here. So too the
perceiver, by virtue of its intent on the object, (reaches the state of awareness
that) ‘I have known this’, and (so), free of desire (to know more) because of the
(sense of) satisfaction that arises (thereby), attains rest within its own nature.

Thus, it is possible for full supreme consciousness to arise by the dynamic union

of subject and object also.

! The reason why the iris is called ‘Kumārikā’ (‘young virgin’) is because when one
stands in front of somebody else and looks into his or her eyes, a small human figure
that looks like a young woman appears to be reflected in the iris.

! We have seen that Mātṛsadbhāva is Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, the Kālī who is the supreme
goddess of the Krama system. See above, note 3,227.

The spokes of the Wheel of the Inexplicable are the three goddesses (Parā, Parāparā
and Aparā) and Mātṛsadbhāva, when it is ‘undivided’ in its unmanifest state. Its
manifest form with specific fixed parts consists of the four-fold process of emanation
(corresponding to the object), persistence (corresponding to the means of knowledge),
withdrawal (corresponding to the subject), and the fourth encompassing state of the
Inexplicable beyond them, deployed in the circles of the eyes as described.
! The Wheels are in pairs, as they are projected into both eyes. Thus, there are two


Wheels of sixteen, twelve, eight and four spokes. These are:


1) The white circle of the eye. It contains the Wheel with sixteen spokes, which

corresponds to a) the object of knowledge, b) creation, and c) the Wheel of the

Inexplicable. This is the Wheel of the Moon.

2) The red circle outside it (hidden by the eyelids) contains the Wheel with twelve

spokes, which is the Wheel of the Twelve Kālīs, and corresponds to a) the means of
knowledge and b) persistence. This the Wheel of the Sun.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


TATṬTĪTTTATIg RTKI T ÑYIA: I 232 I
yathā yoniś ca liṅgaṁ ca saṁyogāt sravate ‘mṛtam |
tathāmṛtāgnisaṁyogād dravatas te na saṁśayaḥ || 131 ||
3) The iris, which is the ‘black and white’ circle, between the black pupil and the white

circle, corresponds to a) the subject and b) destruction. It contains a Wheel of eight rays
consisting of the three Bhairavas, the three Goddesses Parā, Parāparā and Aparā, along

with Kuleśvara and Kuleśvarī. This is the Wheel of Fire.

4) The black circle, that is, the pupil, corresponds to pure cognitive consciousness
(pramā, pramiti) and consists of four rays corresponding to the three Goddesses and
Mātrṛṣadbhāva (i.e. Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī).

The Wheel of twelve rays is located in the two red circles around the borders of
the eyeballs. There are two other Wheels that partake of the colour of both, between the
black pupils (of four rays) and the white circles (of sixteen rays), within which there are
two other circles, black as collyrium, each with four rays. In the two Wheels of Agni
and Soma —- Fire and Moon (of eight and sixteen rays, corresponding to the subject and
object, respectively), the two, subject and object, come together and mutually unfold out
and fold into one another. As the eight-spoked Wheel of subjectivity expands, the
sixteen-spoked Wheel of objectivity contracts and vice versa. Subject and object expand
and contract in relation to one another according to which one predominates over the
other. In the first moment of perception (the eight-spoked Wheel of) the Fire of the
subject burns brightly; in the second, (the sixteen-spoked Wheel of) the Moon of the
object.
Although the Wheel of the Twelve Kaālīs, which is that of perception
(pramāṇa), is established in the Inexplicable (anākhya), it is red because of the presence

of objectivity. As the object is one with the subject, and because it is not separate from

the four Wheels themselves, it has twelve spokes. Moreover, containing within itself the
object of awareness, it also manifests externally. The eight-spoked Wheel is in the iris

between the white and the black circles, that is, it encompasses the black circle while it

is itself surrounded by the white one, which symbolizes the resting of the means of
knowledge in the experiencing subject. Although it is not essentially different from the

four Wheels, it is principally the experiencing subject, corresponding to the state of

withdrawal of objectivity. The eight spokes are the Three Bhairavas and Three
Goddesses of the Trika, Parā, Parāparā and Aparā, along with Kuleśvara and Kuleśvarī.

The Black Wheel of the pupil consists of the Three Goddesses of the Trika and
Mātr̥ṣadbhāva of the Kālīkrama. It is the object of knowledge, where the subject rests in
pure gnosis itself. In other words, it manifests as the Wheel of the Inexplicable
(Anākhya

Cakra),

which

consists

of pure

knowledge

(pramāmātra)

and

its

corresponding state (pramitibhāva), with its pertinent category of reality (satattva). It is
black, as it is undifferentiated darkness, because it is dissolves away all things (into pure

noetic consciousness). Thus, there are the four states in the eye in their own particular

form of creation and merger etc.

The Wheels of the Fire and Moon represent the subject and object, mutually
conjoined, expanding and contracting in relation to one another. When the subject

contracts into itself, it unfolds the object of knowledge. Conversely, the contraction of

the object is accompanied by the expansion of the subject, alternating in the rhythm of
emanation and withdrawal. The object of knowledge does not rest within the subject
when the means of knowledge is active, but when the subject, directed at the object,
experiences that “I know this”, it is satisfied and comes to rest within itself, where

subject and object unite in the plenitude of consciousness.

TANTRĀLOKA

Just as the (female) Yoni and (male) Liṅga stream forth nectar by

(their) union, similarly, no doubt, the Fire (of the subject) and the Moon

(amṛta) (of the object) exude (nectar) by (their) union."

In accord with the (following) teaching, their union is mutual

penetration (āveśa):

‘the Lord of Mantra, having penetrated Māyā with (His) energies,
created the universe in order to accomplish a means for worldly enjoyment for

one who desires it’!

The Yoni is Māyā, and the Liṅga, according to (the following)
teaching, is the Supreme Lord, Who performs the five functions of creation and

the rest.

Read with MSs Ch, Jh, N, T: sravate for sravato.

“2" The double entendre here is obvious. Based on the principle that the universal is
reflected in the particular, the Yoni is both Māyā, the Goddess who is the source of the

universe of duality, and the female organ. Similarly, its complimentary opposite is the

Liṅga, which is both the imperishable ground of reality from which all things arise and
into which they dissolve away, and the male organ. In cognitive terms, they correspond
to the Fire of the subject and the Moon of the object. Clearly, throughout this account,
amongst the implicit layers of meaning is the dynamism of sexual arousal of the lunar
Yogi and the fiery Yoginī. The red Fire arouses the white Moon full of seed. The

delightfully cooling full moon, shining in a hot Indian summer night does indeed feel as
if it exudes nectar. The Yoginī, burning with the passionate Fire of subjectivity, arouses

the stolid Yogi, softening his staunch, distant reserve. He melts and flows. The Moon of
objectivity rises, descending from the original integral and free oneness of
consciousness, when the object distances itself from the subject and separates from it.
But then the Fire of subjectivity heats it, and it emits its vitalizing seed. Once the lunar
nectar has flowed down and filled all that is below, the lower spread of consciousness,

thus full and satisfied, then flows back up, to re-enter its original source and resume its

original state, and so affords an opportunity to regain that original lost liberated state.
This happens for the first time here, and then twice again (133ab and 141cd). Here the
flow is from the original pulse of consciousness, from whence it flows down again into

the body to form the individual subjectivity within it which, if all goes well, is then
transported upwards to regain the summit of consciousness. Otherwise, it flows down

again, but this time into the lower body from there, when it has reached its lower

extremity, it rises as the Fire, now that of the subtle and physical body, that caused it to
flow down. Each time the passionate Fire of subjectivity melts the Moon of objectivity,
it consumes its flood of nectar, and nourished by it, absorbs its objectivity, and so rises
up back into supreme consciousness.

“T MV 1/25. TĀ 9/147-149ab is a paraphrase of MV 1/24cd-25, which is quoted by
Jayaratha there and ad 9/61. MV 1/25d is quoted in TĀv ad 9/40cd-41ab.

All Māyā or saṁsāric existence is the Yoni (symbolized by the letter E). It is Empty.
Māyā has no independent existence, everything is the divine effulgence of pure
consciousness. All phenomena are momentary. They are emitted from consciousness
and dissolve away into it at each instant. This process is the eternal flux of reality, and
so is in itself (ultimate) reality. Although it is always defining itself in this form or that,
as empirical knowledge, even so, it eludes empirical knowledge, for it is the very

process by which empirical knowledge arises. This Māyā is the Yoni — the creative

source of all things, that is, the Lord’s freedom. Liṅga is the Supreme Lord. The
universe is created by the union of these two.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


‘The learned call the imperishable plane, (which is the universal) cause
of emanation and withdrawal, with the word ‘liṅga’ because it dissolves (all)

things (away) (laya), and because (it makes them) come forth (āgamana).

‘Just as’ the two ‘stream forth’, that is, (once united) they generate
emanation, similarly, the two Wheels of sixteen and eight spokes ‘no doubt”
(do so also). ‘ʻBy the union’, which is (their) mutual intent on one another, that
is, of the Moon (the Wheel of sixteen spokes), which is the object, and of the
Fire (the Wheel of eight spokes), which is the subject, they ‘exude’ nectar, that

is, the supreme principle of consciousness, which, because it is unmeasured by

time, is without beginning or end. The meaning is that they flow out in that
form. The intended sense is that consciousness itself, (initially) in a gross state

(āśyānībhūtā), assuming the form of (all phenomena), such as (the
experience) ‘blue’, having destroyed (vilāpya) that form and coming to rest in
the subject through the development of the means of knowledge, manifests
radiantly in its own form as one with the subject. This is the intended

(meaning).

“ Lord Śiva performs five functions (kṛtya). They are emanation (sṛṣṭi), persistence

(sthiti) and withdrawal (saṁhāra), which relate to the world, along with grace
(anugraha) and obscuration (tirodhāna), which relate to the individual soul. The last
two functions are the specific subjects of Chapters Thirteen and Fourteen of the
Tantrāloka, respectively. The previously three are dealt with generically in Chapters Six

to Twelve. See Dyczkowski 1992a: 178 ff. for a description of the functions, their
relation to perception, and their equivalents according to the Krama school.
2 The word ‘liīga’ means, ‘sign’, ‘gender’ or phallus. Shaped like a phallus, or
sometimes just an aniconic stone, the Liṅga is worshipped as a representation or ‘sign’
of Śiva. The texts commonly supply a didactic etymology of the word, as here in this

verse, deriving from the words ‘laya’, ‘merger’ and ‘gam’ ‘going’ or, as here,
‘āgamana’ ʻcoming forth’. The Liṅga thus represents Śiva, into which all the universe
dissolves away and from whence it comes forth. See below, note to 5/114 (113cd114ab).
“ The word ‘amṛta’ — ‘nectar’ — literally means ‘not deadʼ, that is, undying and eternal.
Consciousness, which is not subject to time, is such and so has no beginning or end.

āśyānībhūtā literally means ‘being in a coagulated state’. Just as consciousness is
said to contract to manifest as conditioned objectivity and expand to manifest as
unconditioned subjectivity, by another analogy, it is also said to ‘coagulate’ and ‘melt’.
Cf. below, 4/158ab.
“ The dynamics of two of the four cycles or ‘wheels’ are described here. One is the

cycle of eight phases, which is that of subjectivity and Fire. The other is the cycle of
sixteen phases, which is that of objectivity and the Moon. They work together, rotating,

as it were, in and out of each other. The pure subject, devoid of objectivity, cannot be
defined as being in any place or at any time. Nor can it be said to have specific qualities.
These define and delimit the countless individual objects that populate the sphere of
objectivity. As the wheel of subjectivity rotates, the subject pours out into the sphere of

objectivity through the channels of the senses, that is, the means of knowledge. In this

way, subjective, unconditioned consciousness focuses down onto specific objects, and
so ‘condenses’ into a gross form. The cycle of objectivity now becomes dominant. As
that rotates, it moves through that of the means of knowledge back into the subject,

where it comes to rest. And so, it goes on from inner to outer, outer to inner. The yogi
who practices to focus his attention on this dynamic union of subject and object, and
experiences it as that of universal consciousness, enters Kramamudrā, that flows with

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely, (one may ask) the daily commerce of subject and object etc. is
that of Māyā; so how can that be such, when that (consciousness) exists (and
operates in this way)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

taccakrapīḍanād rātrau jyotir bhāty arkasomagam |
tāṁ drṣṭvā paramāṁ jyotsnāṁ kālajñānaṁ pravartate || 132 ||
The light (of the subject), beyond the Sun (of the means of
knowledge) and the Moon (of objectivity), shines by pressing these two
Wheels (of sixteen and eight spokes embodied in the male and female
organs, respectively,) at night (when the duality of Māyā prevails, during

the prelude to union, prior to the dawning of subjectivity). Beholding that
Supreme Light (as one’s own nature), the Knowledge of Time (which is
the supreme reality) arises.

‘By pressingʼ, that is, drawing out the essential reality (sārārtha) of
‘these two Wheels’ of eight and sixteen spokes, which are the subject and
object, ‘at night’ even when (the duality of) Māyā prevails, ‘the light’, which is
‘beyond the Sun and the Moon’ʼ, that is, the subject beyond the means of

knowledge and the object, ‘shinesʼ. (This light) is ‘supreme’ with respect to the

means of knowledge and the rest. It is called ‘the Light’ because it nourishes
etc. all things. ‘Beholdingʼ. that is, perceiving it as one’s own nature, ‘the
Knowledge of Time arises’. The meaning is that, in accord with the teaching

that: ʻTime, which is Bhairava, emits the universe beginning with (Śiva, its
universal) cause, up to (a tiny) insect, N time (kāla) is the full Light (of

consciousness), the sole nature of which is the supreme subject, because it
generates

(kalana)

the

universe,

which

is

emanation

(persistence,

and

the ‘nectar” of the aesthetic delight of ‘the supreme principle of consciousness’ by the
pressing and rubbing together of the two polarities, subject and object, Sun and Moon,

Śiva and Śakti, and, as is taughtin the following verses, Siddha and Yoginī. Concerning
Kramamudrā and Bhairavamudrā, see Dyczkowski 1987: 159-161.

‘2 See above 3/252cd-253ab and below, 4/173cd-175, for various meanings of the root
kal, from which the word kāla, meaning time, is derived. Here the expression
Knowledge of Time can well be taken to mean the realisation or attainment of the
ultimate reality, which is Bhairava, the Deity Time. But more commonly in the Tantras,

it means knowledge of the time when death approaches. The Tantras of most major
schools of the early period, that is, up to around the eleventh century when Abhinava
lived, teach several methods by which the yogi can cultivate this ability and
prognosticate from various signs when death is approaching, knowing that he can take
measures to postpone it or at least prepare himself for it. The yogic procedure for that is

called Kālavañcana — Cheating Death; see below note 28,258 to 28/256cd-259ab.

“ Kālikāstotra v. 6ab. See above, TĀv ad 3/234, where the whole verse is quoted. See
note there. This line is also quoted below in TĀy ad 4/168 and ad 4/173ab.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


destruction). Its ‘knowledge arises’ means that (Light) itself manifests in that
form (as the Knowledge of Time).

Surely (one may ask,) if that is so, would it not be the manifestation of

(the immanent) All (rather than that of the transcendental Light)? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

sahasrāraṁ bhavec cakraṁ tābhyām upari saṁsthitam ḷ
The Wheel of a Thousand Spokes is located above these two
(Wheels of eight and sixteen spokes, subject and object). (133ab)
‘The Wheel ofa Thousand Spokesʼ is the universe which, as the living

beings (bhūta), (individual) phenomena (bhāva) and worlds (bhuvana) etc., is of

endless kinds (bheda). It ‘is located above these two’ Wheels of eight and
sixteen spokes in the sense that, even though it is being (constantly) separated
off (from consciousness), it manifests radiantly posited within its own (essential
conscious nature) (svasaṁlagna).

Again, (other) secondary wheels also arise from that Wheel, which is all
things. Thus, he says:

I 233 II
tataś cakrāt samudbhūtaṁ brahmāṇḍaṁ tad udāhṛtam || 133 I|
(133cd)

What has arisen from that Wheel is called the Egg of Brahmā.
‘The Egg of Brahmā’ also stands for (all the other Eggs, including) the

Egg of Nature (prakṛti) and the rest.

Surely (one may ask,) how could such a universe, which is of many
kinds, manifest without a break (avicchedena)? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

tatrasthāṁ muñcate dhārāṁ somo hy agnipradīpitaḥ |
" Theṛe are four Eggs. They contain all the principles from Earth to Śakti. They
correspond to four divisions of the universe ruled, respectively, from highest to lowest,
by Iśvara, Rudra, Viṣṇu and Brahmā. They are 1) the Egg of Power (śaktyaṇḍa), which
corresponds to the pure principles from Śakti to Śuddhavidyā (Pure Knowledge); 2) the
Egg of Māyā, which contains the principles from Māyā to Puruṣa (the Individual Soul);

3) the Egg of Nature (Prakṛti), which contains the principles from Nature to Water; 4)
the Egg of Earth, which contains only that principle. The Egg of Brahmā corresponds to

the Egg of Earth (see below, note to TĀv 6/151ab-152ab (150cd-151)). Here Jayaratha

is saying that it stands for the other three Eggs also. Moreover, as the four Eggs are

generated from Śiva, we may surmise that He is present here in the Wheel of a
Thousand Spokes. Concerning the four Eggs, see note 6,371 ad 6/170cd-171ab (170).

TANTRĀLOKA

The Moon (of objectivity), enflamed by the Fire (of subjectivity),
releases the stream (of the nectar of universal manifestation) present there
(within it). (134ab)
‘The Moon’, which is the power of action, is ‘enflamed by the Fire’,
which is one with the supreme subject, by (the power of) its own (inherent)

freedom, and so, energized in its extroverted state, it ‘releases the stream (of
universal manifestation) present thereʼ, that is, everywhere here (in the

sphere of objectivity). (This means) that it manifests radiantly as the unbroken
flow of subject and object etc., by virtue of which this cosmic expansion

(viśvasphāra is so (extensive) (iyat).

It not only emits this universe which is common (to all), it also (emits)

the one (which is personal and) not common (to everybody). Thus, he says:

gSTdTĪd TTGGTHITH-ĀTTHĀTTĀĒT
I| 23% |I
sṛjatītthaṁ jagat sarvam ātmany ātmany anantakam || 134 ||

(134cd)

It emits in this way the entire infinite universe within (each) soul.

‘Within (each) soul’ means (that a personal universe is emitted) for

each individual soul. And how is that?

ĪIBJJJCJRIIITRṢĀA
TTT: |

z l] #aīī TJFAṬTTTTḤ
I 3.,

evaṁ krameṇa sarvatra cakreṣv amṛtam uttamam || 135 ||
somaḥ sravati yāvac ca pañcānāṁ cakrapaddhatiḥ |
Now the Moon rains down in this way (eva) (its) most excellent

nectar everywhere and in every way progressively (krameṇa) into the eight
The literal meaning is ‘opening up as all things’. Consciousness, the supreme

perceiver, ‘opens up’, expanding into the manifestation of everything at each moment,
by turning away, as it were, from its transcendental nature, in which it looks inwardly,

to its immanent nature as all things, when it looks outwards. In its extroverted state,

when it opens up as all things, consciousness flows out of itself, as it were, as the stream
of subject, object and means of knowledge.

Although the pure conscious nature of each individual soul is essentially the same,
thus ensuring that they share a common reality, at the level of Māyā, each one lives in

the universe emitted for it in accord with its Karma etc. See for example below 8/309-

310 (308cd-310ab). However, at the level of the Pure Principles, there is just one
universe, which is common to all individual souls, and shines at one with their essential,
universal consciousness nature. In this way they inwardly share a common objective
reality, even as they each live in their own outer world.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


spokes (of the Wheel of Fire), along with the two Wheels of sixteen and
twelve spokes and (into all) the wheels, until the series of Wheels of five
(modalities is made fully manifest). (135-136ab)
The sense of ‘etc.’ can be understood by the use of the plural in the

expression ‘into the (wheels of) eight spokesʼ, and so, by implying the four-

spoked wheel also, ‘along with the Wheels of sixteen and twelve spokes’,
(the meaning is that this lunar nectar pours down) everywhere into all these four
Wheels ‘progressively’, that is, in a descending (order), ‘thusʼ, in the manner

explained, ‘in all ways’ and every way. ‘The most excellent nectar’ is one’s

own (conscious) essence in an external form. ‘The Moon’ is the power of

action. In other words, the meaning is that it ‘rains down’ until ‘the series’ of
five modalities of the senses (buddhīndriya) and the rest of the four Wheels

manifests, right up to the Earth Principle in a gross form as the object.
The general sense is that the Supreme Lord, desiring to make (His)

cosmic form manifest (as all things) by virtue (of the power) of His own

(innate) freedom, assuming the form of the means and object of knowledge etc.,
by the progressive manifestation of the contracted state of subjectivity and the

The translation follows Jayaratha’s explanation. However, another possible

tranṣlation is: “from the two Wheels of sixteen and twelve spokes the Moon rains down

in this way (evaṁ krameṇa) the supreme nectar everywhere in (all the) wheels of eight
spokes (and the rest). If this one is correct, the ‘nectar’ streams from the contact of the

sphere of objectivity with that of the means of knowledge. However, in the previous
verse we saw that the polarity is represented by the Wheels of sixteen and eight spokes
of the spheres of objectivity and subjectivity. This is as we would expect. Subject and
object making contact generate the state of pure cognitive awareness, which is one with

pure consciousness. The same takes place when a couple is engaged in union with
awareness of the essential conscious nature of themselves as the consciousness that
manifests through these polarities. The original source certainly did not relate these

‘wheels’ʼ to polarities of perception. Even so, the logic should hold for the cognitive

analogy to be consistent.

Swami Lakshmanjoo understands ‘by means of” rather than ‘along with’. These two
wheels, the sixteen-spoked one of objectivity embodied in the woman and the twelvespoked one of the cognitive organs embodied in the man, when united, serve as the
means to enter into the eight and four-spoked wheels, representing subjectivity and the
pure subjective consciousness beyond, respectively.

The four wheels (that is, configurations) beginning with the five senses of
knowledge, are those along with the five senses of action, the five subtle and five gross
elements. Thus, each is of five kinds, and the series ends with the element Earth. It is

possible, however, that Abhinava refers to five wheels, as Gnoli understands him to be
saying. If that is so, Jayaratha has misunderstood. But Gnoli understands these lines by
Jayaratha differently. Thus, he writes in a note that: ‘according to Jayaratha, the five

Wheels are made up of the four Wheels of the five senses of knowledge and action, the

five subtle and gross elements, perhaps the ego, from which they originate, should be

added as a fifth.’ According to Swami Lakshmanjoo, the five are the five sensations,

then the five senses of knowledge, and then contact also takes place with the organs of

action. Further ahead, he says that the creation of the five-fold wheel is that of the
senses.

TANTRĀLOKA

rest, manifests the body made of the five gross elements and the rest, consisting

of causes and effects.

He not only emits the universe is in this way, he also withdraws it.


Thus, he says:


cq: ftafT taaṁ ēaā āa sfā xŪq 1 23

tat puṇaḥ pibati prĩtyā haṁso haṁsa iti sphuran || 136 ||
sakṛd yasya tu saṁśrutyā puṇyapāpair na lipyate |
Then again, shining radiantly as (the Goose (haṁsa), that is, the
supreme subject, resonant with the awareness), “I am this (haṅṁṣa)! I am
this (haṁsa)” he drinks (all) that (nectar) with delight. He who hears this

(Unstruck Sound just) once is not sullied by either virtue or sin. (136cd137ab)

(He is thus) ‘shining radiantly without a break, because he is
constantly engaged in the (act of) reflective awareness which is his own
essential nature that, uncreated (and authentic), emanates and withdraws (all

things), namely that, ‘although I am the supreme subject, (I am) this cosmic

expansion" and ‘that cosmic expansion also is just me (the supreme subject
alone)ʼ. In accord with the dictum that ‘Śiva, the Supreme Self is Haṁsa (the

Goose)ʼ, the supreme subject, (here) called Fire, (shining thus,) is the (Divine)

The series of Principles are made manifest progressively in such a way that the

previous higher ones are the causes of the subsequent lower ones, which are their
effects.

Únderstanding the entire passage from the YS to be referring also to the union of
Siddha and Yoginī (the two ‘eyes'), commenting on these verses Swami Lakshmanjoo

refers to the following passage, quoted in TĀv ad 1/1 and ad 29/101cd-102:

“(Each) should meditate on (their) mutual nature (ripa), which is Śiva and
Śakti, and not entertain human ideas (of each other) involving attachment, delusion, or
the like. Everything should be done by the most excellent adepts as the contemplation of

cognitive consciousness (jñūānabhāvanā).

Swami Lakshmanjoo warns that if there is any attachment to the body, ‘all these

processes are ruined — there is no Yāga’, concerning which he quotes TĀ 29/5:

“(Only) that sacrifice (yāga) is such (that is, a true Kaula sacrifice) which (is
offered by one) who, seeing all phenomena as they really are (tathātvena), the multitude
of his doubts (and their consequent thought constructs) are destroyed.”
Both partners must experience Haṁsa (that is why it is repeated), and that

‘functioning in me is inseparable from me.” This is the fruit in Nirañjana [the Stainless].

See above, 3/172 (171cd-172ab) and note 3,565.

Read sa viśvasphāraḥ for saviśvasphāraḥ in both instances.
“ SVT 6/25a. The complete line reads:

paramātmā śivo haṁsṣas tv apareṇa samanvitaḥ |


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Goose (haṁsa) (so called because He has the power) to destroy (hāna) and take

up (samādāna) (all things).

“Then again’, after (the process of) emanation and the rest, ‘he drinks’
the universe of perceivers and (their) objects etc., that is, makes it (all) one with
himself itself, (and so) withdraws it (into pure consciousness) ‘with the delight’
which is the bliss of (his innate) freedom. This is the meaning. Whoever
‘hearsʼ, that is, experiences directly, ‘this’ Goose who is the Supreme Self

‘once’, only just a single time, ‘is not sullied by either virtue or sin’, and is

not touched by consequences (bhoga) of auspicious and inauspicious actions,
although they are his own. Rather he is freed from them. This is the meaning. It

is said in this way that a person who has experienced that directly has achieved

the goal, not another (who has not). As is said:

‘A man has not achieved the goal as long as he does not attain the

‘Śiva, the Supreme Self is Haṁsa (the Goose), associated with the other (group of five

praṇavas)..

Kṣemarāja explains: yo haṁsaḥ svayam uccaradrūpo vācakavṛttyā, vācyavṛttyā tu
paramātmā sarveṣāṁ brahmādīnām anuprāṇakaḥ, paranirvāṇātmakaśreyaḥpradatvāc
chivaḥ vācyavācakayor atrāvibhāgena prakāśānandaghanatvena sphuraṇāt so ‘yam

haṁsaḥ,
apareṇeti
proktarūpa-vācyavācakarūpeṇa
.praṇavapañcakena
samanvitaḥ saṁbaddáhaḥ | atra cakārãādirãpeṣu praṇaveṣu hraṣvādyuccārakalā

jāgradādayo ‘vasthābhedāḥ, pṛthivī-prakṛtimāyeśvarasadāśivāntāni cabrahmādy-

adhiṣṭhitāni tattvāni, iti pañcakāntarāṇy eṭāny antarbhūtāni nirṇītadṛśā praṇavarūpāṇy
anusartavyāni ||

‘That Haṁsa that utters forth (itself) by itself as the modality of the denotator

is, in the modality of the object of denotation, the Supreme Self who gives life to all (the
other five causal deities), beginning with Brahmā. (He is) Śiva because he bestows the
supreme good (śreyas), which is Supreme Nirvāṇa. He flashes forth here as the dense
(uninterrupted) Light and bliss (of consciousness), which is the undivided (domain of
both) the denotator and the object of denotation. Thus, He is this Haṁsa, which is such.
He is ‘associated with the otherʼ, that is, he is linked (saṁbaddha) with the group of five
Praṇavas that are the aforestated object of denotation and (its) denotator. Moreover, the
energies of the short (and long) etc. utterances here within the Praṇavas, in the form of
which are the letters A etc., are the various states (of consciousness), namely, waking

and the rest. Again, the principles of Earth, Nature, Māyā, and Īśvara, ending with
Sadāśiva, presided over by Brahmā and the rest (respectively), constitute another group
of five that are included within them which, according to the established view, should
follow in consonance in the form of the Praṇavas.' Concerning the six Causal Deities,
see note 6,389 to TĀv ad 6/187 (186cd-187ab).

Read hānasamādānadharma for hānasamādānadharmā.
ṢVṬ 6/33ab. Kṣemarāja clarifies that ‘attaining the Goose’ means ‘recognizing it as

being oneself.” The previous verse makes it clear that Haṁsa is ultimate reality. There
we read: “(A person) wanders in the world of transmigration as long as he does not
atṭain reality (tattva). Once the supreme reality has been known, he is no longer born
anywhere.”

TANTRĀLOKA

Having thus explained by the way (that this state of consciousness)
withdraws (all things back into itself), he returns to the main point.

TJI. TÑTĒISJ SJTTI āITGTTTTḤ
I/2319 1

fē: |

pañcāre savikāro ʻtha bhūtvā somasrutāmṛtāt || 137 ||
dhāvati trirasārāṇi guhyacakrāṇy asau vibhuḥ |
Now, because of the nectar that streams from the Moon within (the
Wheel of the body, consisting of) the five spokes (of the gross elements), the
All-pervasive Lord (vibhu), subject to the changes (vikāra) (of phenomenal

existence), rushes (down) to the secret wheels (of the genitals, made) of
three spokes and three juices (rasa). (137cd-138ab)

‘Now he’ who is called the Goose, that is, Śiva, the Supreme Soul, who
is ‘the All-pervasive Lord’, assuming a contracted (state of consciousness) by

(the power) of His own (innate) freedom and, ‘subject to the changes (of

phenomenal existence) because (he) is linked to the changes (vikāra) of birth
and the rest (to which the body is subject), develops within the (the Wheel
with) ‘five spokesʼ, that is, (the physical) body made of the five gross elements,
because (he is) nourished by the nectar that flows from the Moon in the manner
described previously. And so, intent (unmukha) as He is (in that condition) on

‘the secret wheels’ of the genitals (ianmasthāna) and the rest, ‘he rushes

(down) (towards them), with the desire to emit the universe. (The Wheels are
made of) ‘ṭhree spokes and three juicesʼ. In accord with the words (of the

scripture): ‘the left one flows, transporting water, the middle one, sperm, and the
one on the right, bloodʼ, the three juices are water and the rest. Their number
corresponds to that of (their) form as channels (nāḍī) and spokes, which are of
those kinds. There are three spokes when separated, and six spokes in the couple
in union (yāmala). Thus, they are ‘secret’, because they (should not be)

revealed. This is the meaning.

Swami Lakṣhmanjoo understands vikāra ‘changes’ to refer to the sexual excitement
of the two partners engaged in this practice.

See 29/150cd-153ab, where what happens there is described.
janmādayo vikārāḥ ṣaḍ bhāvabhedasya yonayaḥ | (VP 1/3) quoted in ĪPVV 3, p. 9.
This is called the Seal of the Six Spokes (sadaramudrā).

Read aprakāśyatvāt for aprakāśatvāt. Jayaratha is hinting here at the yogic sexual

union, which is the practice Abhinavagupta is teaching in a veiled way, along with the
practice of reflective awareness of the process of perception, and the movement in the

body of the vital breath. The three-spoked Wheel is a triangle formed in the genitals
from the conjunction of the three channels (1āḍī) of the vital breath. They are Iḍā, on the
right of the triangle, Piṅgalā, on the left and Suṣumṇā in the middle, represented by the

cross bar. In the female partner it faces downward and in the male upwards. The Wheel

with Six Spokes (ṣadaracakra) is a hexagon that is formed when the two unite in the
Seal of the Six Spokes (ṣadāramudrā) (see above, commentary on 3/95ab-95cd (95cd96ab)). The vital force, which is the energy of consciousness that, assuming a limited


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Surely (one may ask,) if (the Lord) desires to emit the universe, what is
the point of his acting with intent on this and that (aspect of this process)? With

this doubt in mind, he says:

3aī] īd sTīcaī+ ā ā Tahlōaī I| 23 ||
yato jātaṁ jagal līnaṁ yatra ca svakalīlayā || 138 I|
The universe has arisen from that, and (this is) where it is merged

(and dissolves away) by its own (free and spontaneous) play (svakalīlayā).

(138cad)

‘The universe has arisen’ and poured forth (out of consciousness),

even though it is not separate from it (for otherwise it could not manifest), by
separating (itself off) ‘from that’, that is, from these secret Wheels (in the

genitals), ‘by its own (free and spontaneous) play, that is, by its own (innate)
freedom. Moreover, ‘(this is) where it is merged (and dissolves away)ʼ. The
point is that (by referring to the secret Wheel) in this way, (he implies that it is)
the supreme cause of the Supreme Lord, that is, the Supreme Self who desires to
emit the universe.
They are not only at their most productive (sādhakatama) in their
extroverted state, but also when resting in their own nature. Thus, he says:

ftfzz ṇfTa a dūīaa aT u 238 1

tatrānandaś ca sarvasya brahmacārī ca tatparaḥ |
tatra siddhiś ca muktiś ca samaṁ saṁprāpyate dvayam || 139 ||
The (true) bliss of all is there (and so too the true celibate)

brahmacārin. (Whoever) is intent (solely) on that attains there equally both
accomplishment (siddhi) and liberation.

‘(It is the true bliss) of allʼ, even those of the lowest caste (pāmara).
One who is ‘intent’ has that as his only goal, whether he be a Yogi, a man of
knowledge, or (a true celibate) brahmacārin, that is, one who practices (carati)
the Brahman which is bliss, for it is taught that ‘bliss is the nature of the

Brahman’. The meaning is that he shines radiantly at one with the Supreme
(‘contracted’) state, is the essence of the individual Self identified in its most

fundamental nature with the All-pervasive Lord, ‘rushes’ down to the three-spoked

Wheel of each partner ‘with the desire to emit’, intent as they are on one another. This
generates the bliss of emission (visarga), that pours out in the centre, unfolding as the

cosmic consciousness which transfigures the partners’ bodies etc., to then reabsorb the
All emitted in this way back into pure consciousness. Then the cycle recommences. This

‘expansion’ into cosmic consciousness and ‘contraction’ into pure consciousness and
vice versa is Kramamudrā (see above, note 4,427).

See above, note to TĀv ad 1/242.

TANTRĀLOKA

Brahman. Thus (he attains) ‘equallyʼ (both) ‘accomplishment’, which is bliss

here in this world, and ‘liberation’, which is the condition of one who follows
the Brahman, because bliss itself is the essential nature of the Brahman.

The word brahmacārin literally means, ‘a follower of the Brahman’. In common

usage, the word denotes a person who is celibate in general, and especially an unmarried
student who is ‘following the Brahman’ in the sense that he is studying the sacred texts,

which themselves as the sacred word — the Brahman — teach the Brahman. As a celibate

student he retains his seed. Thus, instead of flowing down, it flows upwards, and so he
is one whose ‘seed is above’ (ūrdhvaretas). Such also is the condition of the yogi. The
upward flow of seed carries with it the life force that enshrines the consciousness of the
individual soul. We see this general principle applied here also.

However, in this context, the practice of Brahmacaryā is understood

differently. Here the Brahman the yogi practices and follows is understood as ‘blissʼ, an
identification which is well affirmed already in the Upaniṣads. Clearly conscious of this,
Jayaratha, like his Kashmiri Śaiva predecessors, quotes a passage from the Upaniṣads
which says this. He suggests thereby that this bliss is experienced in sexual union. The

word for ‘bliss” here is ‘ānanda’. Although a yery common word in classical Sanskrit, it
is not found in early Vedic Sanskrit, where other words denote ‘happiness’, ‘joy’ or

‘bliss’. The earliest sense was specifically the ‘bliss’ experienced in sexual union. One
could quote numerous examples of this usage in later Vedic literature, especially the
Upaniṣads. One well-known passage declares that creatures are not born from the male
or female organs, nor from sperm or blood, or even their union, ‘creatures are born from
bliss’ (ānandāt prajāyante prajāḥ). Taittirīyopaniṣad 3/6. Later Vedic literature

represents sexual union as a sacred rite. We find an extensive, detailed example of the
procedures of this in a long passage in the Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣad that takes up the
whole of the fourth brahmana of chapter six. These procedures consist for the most part

of formulations of intentions based on a guided understanding of the partners and their
union as sacred, and so set in relation to deity and the entire creation. It begins:

“Verily, of created things here earth is the essence; of earth, water; of water,
plants; of plants, flowers; of flowers, fruits; of fruits, man (puruṣa); of man, semen.

Prajāpati (‘Lord of the Creature’) bethought himself: ‘Come, let me provide
him a firm basis!” So he created woman. When he created her, he revered her from
below. — Therefore, one should revere women from below. — He stretched out for
himself that stone which projects. With that he impregnated her.
Her lap is a sacrificial altar; her hairs, the sacrificial grass; her skin the soma-

press. The two labia of the vulva are the fire in the middle. Verily, indeed, as great as is
the world of him who sacrifices with the Vājapeya (‘Strength-libation’) sacrifice, so
great is the world of him who practices sexual intercourse, knowing this; he turns the
good deeds of women to himself. But he who practices sexual intercourse without
knowing this — women turn his good deeds to themselves.' BṛrUp 6/4/1-3

Read alone, this passage celebrates the sacrality of sexuality, furnishing a way

in which the partners can perceive themselves as spiritual beings when engaged in
intimacy. The result for the man, if done with this spirit, is ‘turning the good deeds of
womenʼ to himself. It says nothing about procreation, which on the contrary is the major
concern of what follows, although a method is supplied for birth control. Clearly, these

are separate concerns, which although of course closely related, are evidently
distinguishable. We have seen right in the first verse that Abhinavagupta was born

through sacred union of his parents. Throughout the Tantrāloka, practices and states

relating to sacred, yogic and cognitive sexual union are presented repeatedly, in a more

or less overt form, especially Chapter TwentyTwneine, which deals with Kaula ritual. It


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Surely (one may ask,) if it is possible to accomplish the emission of all
things in this way from just this one secret Wheel called the Place of Birth
(janmasthāna) (in the genitals), then why is it referred to in the plural as ‘the
secret Wheels’? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ata ūrdhvaṁ punar yãti yāvad brahmãtmakaṁ padam |
agnīṣomau samau tatra sṛjyete cātmanātmani || 140 ||
From there he again travels upwards until he reaches the plane

which is the Brahman. And there the Fire (of the subject) and Moon (of the

object) emit equally by means of the Self into the Self.

‘From there’ (means) from the Secret Wheel, which, as stated
previously, is called the Place of Birth (in the genitals), ‘he travelsʼ, that is, he

sets out directed towards that, ‘again upwards’ to the supreme plane, which is

the Brahman, located in the End of the Twelve, that is, up to the Secret Wheel

which is rightly called emission (visarga), and is linked to the three spokes
which are Power, the Pervasive One and the Equal One. This is the meaning.

(The word) ‘and’ is (to be understood as indicating) the cause (or reason)."

There ‘the Fire and Moon’, which are the subject and object, that is,
subjectivity (ahantā) and objectivity (idantā), ‘emit equally by means of the
Self’, that is, by means of the Supreme Lord Who is called the Goose (Harīsa),
‘into the Self’, that is, into His own foundation (bhitti). They manifest on an

equal footing in accord with the (Pratyabhijñā) teaching that: “True Knowledge

has been translated by Dupuche (see bibliography). In this sense, ‘brahmacaryā’ — ‘the
practice of the Brahman’ — means ‘the practice of the (spiritually transformative) bliss
of sexʼ. ‘The follower of the Brahman’ is one who, intent on yoga, practices the

development of this bliss made manifest through sexual union, consuming meat and

wine offered to the deity (which is not mentioned here) (see below, 29/98cd-100ab and

commentary). The Kaula rite successfully practiced also raises the seed in the form of
the upward flow of vital of the force, often characterized, as here, as Kuṇḍalinī (see
4/141cd-142). Concerning the Kaula understanding of brahmacaryā, see below 29/9798ab and passage ad 29/99-100ab.

Concerning the twelve levels or phases of Sound, culminating in the Transmental, of
which these are the three that precede it, see Appendix to Chapter One. These three
levels are commonly found together. They are represented by three levels — base, middle
and tip — of the prongs of the Trika Trident, above which is the Transmental, where the

three Goddesses of the Trika are seated. See above, note to comm. 1/2 and below TĀ
15/313-314 (= MV 8/69-70). Here it is understood to be the place where the emission

(visarga) of consciousness takes place within itself, to generate the universe at one with
it. This is the upper Secret Wheel that corresponds to the lower Secret Wheel in the
body.

30j.e. ʻand (because) there the Fire and Moon emit equally . . .’

TANTRĀLOKA

is the state of the notions of ‘I’ and ‘this’ (when they share) a common

(identical) foundation.”
If objectivity, that is, the Moon, predominates (udreka) again, then the
universe pours forth (once more from consciousness). Thus, he says:

ĒEŠE|ĒGĒIEI 3zṃṛ ś zāafkrd:

tatrasthas tāpitaḥ somo dvedhā jaṅghe vyavasthitaḥ |
The Moon, which is located there (in the Wheel of Three Spokes
and Three Juices), heated (by the Fire), is established two-fold in the (two)

shanks. (141ab)

“ ĪP_ 3/1/3cd. ĪP 3/1/3a is quoted in TĀv ad 11/28 and ad 30/12cd-14ab. This process

leads to the emergence of the level of consciousness which is free of the divisive
thought constructs that characterize the lower levels below Māyā, experienced by the
countless individual perceivers and their objects. This is impure, false knowledge.
Above Māyā is the domain of Pure Knowledge, in which objectivity and subjectivity are

experienced on an equal footing in the oneness of pure consciousness, as the reflective
awareness that ‘I am (all) this and (all) this am I˚. It is a dynamic state, like breathing.
The interaction between subject and object is now experienced as taking place within
consciousness as phases of its radiant pulsation (spanda). In the phase of its expansion
(unmeṣa), that is, opening outwards with respect to the subjective polarity, the objective

polarity becomes dominant. This is the experience universal, immanent Siva
consciousness has that “all this universe is me”. This is the principle of the Lord who

governs the universe (iīśvara) at one with Him. Simultaneously, in the phase of
contracting (nimeṣa), that is, withdrawing inwards, the subjective polarity comes to the

fore as the objective one is withdrawn. Dominating over it, it is the experience of
universal, immanent Śiva consciousness has that “ḹ am all this universe”. This is the
reality level (taitva) on which Śiva is perpetually tranquil Sadāśiva. As this goes on
within consciousness, the universe of objective experience is emitted and withdrawn

each timeless moment for every individual perceiver who is afflicted by the ‘false’,

‘impure divisive knowledge which is Māyā. ‘True Knowledge’ is the reality level
(tattva) of the universal unitary consciousness above Māyā, which is the common
foundation of the consciousness of ‘I’ and ‘this’ as the two phases of the one pulse of
consciousness, which is all things and their perceivers. Thus, Utpaladeva writes:

‘Īśvara is opening outwards (ummeṣa), Sadāśiva is closing inwards (nimesa).

True Knowledge is the state of the notions of ‘I’ and ‘this’ (when they share) a common

foundation (in consciousness).”

These three are the so-called pure principles or reality levels (tattva) that

together constitute the three aspects of Śiva’s immanent state as all things. Pure or True
Knowledge is the experience of that. Above them are the levels Śakti and then Śiva, that
together are Śiva’s transcendental state, in which the universe is an unmanifest potential
(śakti). Thus, Utpaladeva explains the state of the first three in his vṛtti:

Sadāśiva are, respectively, the opening outwards and the closing inwards, which are the
outer and inner states (of consciousness). Pure Knowledge is the notion (»nati) of one

whose nature is all things that “I am this universe”, by virtue of (his state as the)
common (identical) foundation of external objectivity and internal subjectivity, (which

is such) as there is no difference between (their) repose in the one pure consciousness.”
See below TĀv ad 6/39cd-40ab for Jayaratha’s explanation of this dynamism.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


The meaning is that, established ‘there’ in a state of balance (with the
subject), the Moon, which is the object, is manifest ‘two-fold’ (as both the
universe and the perceiver, in Pure Knowledge). Energized by duality (bheda),
it is ‘established in the (two) shanks’, that is, it manifests (externally) in a
gross form as the universe, right up to the Earth principle.

And how is that? He says:


aaī ẽOIT I 22 1|

adhastaṁ pātayed agnir amṛtaṁ sravati kṣaṇāt || 141 ||
gulphajānvā
vyaktaṁ kuṭilārkapradīpitā |
sā śaktis tā
bhūyaḥ pañcārādikramaṁ sṛjet I| 142 ||
The Fire causes it to fall downwards and, in an instant, it pours out
nectar, (clearly) manifest, into the knees, ankles, and other (parts of the leg

and all the limbs of the body). (Kuṇḍalinī,) this ‘crooked’ (kuṭilā) (lunar)

power, energized (pradīpitā) by the Sun and heated again (by the Fire),

emits (the universe in the form) of the sequence of (the Wheels of) five
spokes (representing the gross elements) and the rest. (141cd-142)

Swami Lakṣhmaṇjoo explains that ‘the jaṅgha [shank] here stands for the universe,

(for it is said that) sthavara — jaṁghama-jagat [the universe is immobile and moving
(jaṁgghama)]. The ‘two’ means the two types of universe, mobile and immobile. ‘There”
is in the state of balance — equally I-ness and this-ness for both partners. Yoginībhū [a
Child Born of a Yoginī] arises through that. This cannot happen if you are not connected

to God consciousness.”
The Moon is here identified with the power of action, which is the ‘crooked’ power
of the Kuṇḍalinī of the vital breath. Kuṇḍalinī is commonly called Kuṭilā — the Crooked
One — in the Tantras. In this aspect, She is ‘crooked’ as the triangular Yoni, which

externally is the source of the universe, and inwardly the expansion of consciousness
that takes place when she ‘straightens out’ and consumes the universe previously
emitted. Accordingly, in this aspect She is said to be ‘riurekhā’, the Straight Line. This

‘straight line’ is actually slightly bent as the first digit of the moon. This contains the
potencies of all the digits that follow, right up to the full moon, which it reabsorbs as

they decrease, up to the new moon. Thus, just as the moon waxes and wanes, as the

lunar digits emerge from and retreat into their unmanifest source, so does the moon of
objectivity move into and out of subjective consciousness. Such is the complex
symbolism that lies behind such enigmatic statements as the following, found in the

Kulakaulinīmata:


bhūtānāṁ sarvayoniḥ r̥jur iva kuṭilā śuddhabalendurekhā || KuKauṂM 21/54d II
‘The universal source (yoni) of (all) existing things, She is the Crooked One

who, as if straight, is the pure line of the young moon.’ KuKauM 21/54d. See

Dyczkowski 2009: intro. vol. 1,278.

The Sun is the means of knowledge that has been ‘heatedʼ, that is, energized, by the
Fire of the subject.

TANTRĀLOKA

(The Fire causes) ‘itʼ, that is, the Moon, (to flow) ‘down’ into the

external form (of consciousness). ‘It pours out the nectar’, that is, the Moon
heated by Fire. As (this lunar power) is the Kuṇḍalinī of the Vital Breath

(prāṇakuṇḍalinī), it is the ‘crooked power’, which is action and the Moon.

It is ‘energized’, awakened by the desire to pour out externally, ‘by the Sun’,
that is, by the subject who rests on the plane of the means of knowledge. Thus
‘heated again’ʼ, that is, energized as (its) external nature, it ‘emits the sequence
of (the Wheels of) five spokes and the rest’. The meaning is that it manifests

the universe consisting of the five gross elements.

He (now) explains (how) that (takes place) within the other senses.

īṣṝ snstī fe=ri aīaācqraraṁīmq |
evaṁ śrotre ‘pi vijñeyaṁ yāvat pādāntagocaram |
One should know (that the same process also takes place within the
other senses) in the same way, (starting with) the sense of hearing up to the
feet. (143ab)

Swami Lakshmanjoo explains that ‘the man discharges amṛta [nectar] when this

Soma [Moon] is placed in the state of idaṁbhāva [objectivity] which has as its essence
the flow of semen (caramadhātuprasarasāra). Soma [Moon] is the woman. Amṛta
[nectar] is in all the limbs of the body in all the ānucakras [ṣubsidiary wheels] in the
legs, knees and ankles — everywhere! Kutilā is the woman. The Sun is the man. After

more excitation of the sequence of (the Wheels of) five spokes (representing the gross
elements) and the rest, a yoginībhiū [Child of a Yoginī] is conceived.”

See above, 3/139ab-142ab (138-141) commentary and notes.

See above, note 4,453.

The nectar continues to fall down below the shank to the knees and ankles, down to
the feet. The ‘nectar’ of the Moon is the essence of objectivity. Travelling up, it melts

away with the rising Fire of the subject, until at the summit of its ascent, it merges into

the Plane of Equality, where the universe is experienced within consciousness by

consciousness as one with itself. In this case, the nectar starts to fall from the lower
Secret Wheel to flow out, stimulated as before, by the Fire of the subject, but this time,
according to Jayaratha, it rests on the plane of the means of knowledge. In other words,

itis now ‘heated’ through the twelve senses. As before, it must first fall down as far as it
can go. The previous descent marked the formation of the embodied soul and the body
in which it resides. Its final point of descent was the same union of the male and female
centres. In this case, the flow of liquid objectivity starts from here, heated initially to

make it fall, and then again, so that by falling ‘in a gross form’ down to the Earth
principle, it forms the outer universe within the body.

N The first sense is generally that of sight. Once having explained how this process
operates with respect to that, the Tantra goes on to examine how the same process
operates with respect to the rest of the senses. The Moon, as Jayaratha has said several

times, is the power of action (kriyāśakti). Fire is the power of the will (icchāśakti), and

the Sun that of knowledge (jñānaśakti). The action that takes place at the higher level
above is cosmic creation and the power of the will that stimulates it, the desire to create

it. Below, at the lower level, it is the activity of the body, senses and mind, that is
stimulated by the will on that level.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

By saying ‘up to the feet’ he says that all the (five) organs of action

(ending with the feet) have this same nature.

This same (conscious) nature is present not only in the senses, which are
the means of knowledge, it is (also present) in the five gross elements, that are
the objects of knowledge. Accordingly, he says:

ṬTTĪR̄RĪTHHRSd JĪHGṬGITGCTT I 23 I

pādāṅguṣṭhāt samārabhya yāvad brahmāṇḍadarśanam || 143 ||

(The same takes place in the body, consisting of the five gross
elements,) starting from the big toe up to the vision of the Egg of Brahmā.
(143cd)

One should also know that (this process takes place) in the same way
within the body, consisting of the five gross elements, ‘starting from the big

toe’ up to the Cavity of Brahmā (on the crown of the head). (This is how this

line) relates to the previous one. In this way, supreme consciousness itself, in
the form of the object (grāhya), is also present on the plane of the object of
knowledge. Thus, here also that is itself the means of knowledge, and so the

point is established (arthasiddha), and will be corroborated here further ahead
(in the following verses).

Surely (one may ask,) what is the purpose of referring to the senses and
the rest as being of this nature? With this doubt in mind, he says:

SdT@ĪRaṬḤṬ JTāĪTEĪÇTT TIHAI: I|I Q“ II
ity ajānan naiva yogī jānan viśvaprabhur bhavet |

jvalann ivāsau brahmādyair dṛśyate parameśvaraḥ || 144 ||

He who does not know this is not a (true) yogi, but he who does is

the Lord of the universe. He who burns as if (shining) with (all the deities)

starting from Brahmā is seen to be the Supreme Lord.

According to TĀ 9/253, the serial order of the organs of action is speech, the hands,
genitals, anus and feet. The order according to the MV 2/32cd is speech, the hands, the
anus, the genitals and the feet. See Appendix to Chapter Thirty concerning the mantras
of the tattvas.
“ The Egg of Brahmā is normally the universe (see above. 4/133cd and note). In this
case, Jayaratha identifies it with the Cavity of Brahmā at the top of the head,
presumably because it is here that the yogi has a ‘vision of the Egg of Brahmā’, looking

down into the body where it is reflected. Swami Lakshmanjoo agrees with Jayaratha.
The state of the primary wheel (nukhyacakra) is found everywhere throughout the body

at this stage of completion. Yogis conjoin the subsidiary wheels (anucakra) of the body

to the primary wheel of consciousness that thus pervades it all.

According to Swami Lakshmanjoo, this verse, which summarizes the practice up to
here, refers covertly to the contemplation of the Wheel of the Twelve Kālīs expounded

just after this passage (cf. below 5/27cd-36 and Dyczkowski 1987: 125). He says:

TANTRĀLOKA

The point is that (by saying) ‘starting from Brahmā’, (he means) the

unfolding expansion of that (vision) is all the world. Although the yogic

sexual practice (caryākrama) is present within the most internal (part of the
process), it is not explained extensively in that respect, because it is both very
clear (to initiates and so need not be explained), and secret (and so needs to be

hidden from those who are not initiates). So one should understand it for

oneself.

So having corroborated (the teachings) with the scriptures, he now

declares its essential meaning.

Ū%hhī Jāā’Ī] gICRITH=hdTṬIGTT II Q I
atra tātparyataḥ proktam akṣe kramacatuṣṭayam |
ekaikatra yatas tena dvādaśātmakatoditā || 145 ||
Here, (this passage) essentially explains how the four processes
(kramacatuṣṭaya) (take place) in each one (of the senses, and so lead to) the
emergence of the twelve-fold condition.
(This process takes place) ‘in each one of the sensesʼ, that is, in all the
senses (together), ‘and so’, because the four processes’ of emanation

‘The meaning is that, however much one may consider a common yogi to be
intent on (the practice of) Yoga, if he does not know this supreme state with its twelve-

fold nature completely, then that yogi cannot in reality be considered to be a yogi. On
the contrary, he who knows these states just as they truly are, can become the lord of the
universe. This is because only the yogi who, contemplating the cycles of emanation,
persistence, withdrawal and the inexplicable, has become the equal of Śiva whose nature
is the shining light (of consciousness), perceives his own (true) nature just as at it is, not
another. In reality, one’s own human effort is incapable of attaining this state, and (in

actual fact) does not contribute anything to attaining it. It is said that only the Supreme
Lord'’s most intense descent of the power (of grace) and the teacher’s grace (kṛpā) is

capable of making (the soul) experience this state.' (KNP p. 20-21)
““ Brahmā governs the first of the four cosmic Eggs. Thus, it appears that by saying
‘starting from Brahmā’, Abhinava is referring to the deities of the four Eggs that extend
from Earth up to Śakti (see below, 6/171ab (170) commentary and note).

Yogic sexual practice ~ caryākrama — unfolds in all three Means. This an example of
how it is practiced in the sphere of the Empowered Means. We have observed numerous
examples of practice in the sphere of the Divine Means in Chapter Three. Further ahead,
in Chapter Five, we will observe several examples in the sphere of the Individual Means
also.
Jayaratha confirms that this passage from the Yogasaṁcāra teaches yogic sexual
practice (caryākrama) and that it ends here.

“ Once Abhinava has presented the meditation taught in the Yogasaṁcāra, which is
first imagined and then, with practice, experienced directly, he teaches that this process
is essentially the experience of the Twelve Kālīs when it takes place through the body
and the senses of the Siddha and Yoginī engaged in union.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


(persistence, withdrawal and the encompassing fourth) take place (avasthāna)

for each one (of the senses) in association with the subject, means and object of

knowledge, ‘the emergence of the twelve-fold condition’ takes place in each

one of the senses. The meaning is that the form of each one of the senses is the

twelve rays (of the Wheel of means of knowledge).

Surely (one may ask,) how is it that he has explained (just) the general
sense (of this passage from the Tantra)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

na vyākhyātaṁ tu nirbhajya yato ʻúisarahasyakam |

It has not been explained in detail because it is very secret. (146ab)
Supreme consciousness is not only on the plane of the means of
knowledge in form of perception (grahaṇa); it is also on the plane of the object
of knowledge, in the form of the object of perception (grāhya). Thus, he says:

The Twelve Kāḹīs
The term kramacatuṣṭaya — ‘the four processes' has a specific technical sense in the
context of Krama practice (see above, note 3,797). Here Jayaratha chooses to ignore that

specific sense, focusing instead on this other more general one, as the context demands.
How this takes place at the Individual level of practice (ānavopāya), which involves

the body and the senses, for the solitary embodied soul (not in union with a partner) is
deṣcribed below in 5/27cd-36. Practice at the Empowered level (śāktopāya), which is
the topic of this chapter, concerns the means through which perception takes place.

Concretely, this comprises the outer senses and inner mental organ, which processes and
identifies the sensations channelled through them. Not infrequently, in this context

pramāṇa refers to this cognitive apparatus. But this is not always the case. The term
may also denote the stream of cognizing perception that travels from the subject out to

its object in order to perceive it. This stream is ‘coloured’ by its object and, returning to
the subject, is then processed by the inner mental faculties which present the subject
with a conceptual representation. Through this representation, if coherent and correct, as
far as it can be, the urge to perceive and know the object the subject felt is satisfied by
the ascertainment (niścaya) which instils in him conviction (niścaya). This final stage

marks the emergence of the resultant knowledge (pramā) which, although attained
through the operation of the senses and mind, is neither sensorial nor conceptual, rather
it is pure noetic consciousness at rest within itself knowing itself, and so thereby the true
nature of the object, perception and perceiver. Beyond the range of conceptual
representation, it encompasses the entire process. Krama doctrine refers to it as the
Inexplicable (anākhyā) and venerates it as the Goddess of Consciousness (sarvidevī),

specifically the form of Kālī called Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī — the Destroyer of Time.
“ Abhinava summarizes what he says here in the Tantrasāra (p. 28-30) as follows:

“There (in that context), the Supreme Lord is full (and all-inclusive) consciousness, and
(His) plenitude (pūrṇatā) is His power (śakti). It is variously named in the scriptures
according to (its) particular (aspects), so that it may abide in some form within the heart
(of the consciousness) of those who contemplate it. (These include) Kula (Totality),
Capacity (sāmārthya), Wave (see below, 4/184), Heart (see below, 4/181), Essence
(sāra), Vibration (spanda), Glorious Power (vibhūti), Mistress of the Three Energies
(trīśikā), Kālī, (Kāla-)Karṣaṇī (the Destroyer of Time), the Fierce One (Canḍī), Speech
(Vaṇī), Worldly Experience (bhoga), Perception (dṛk), Eternal One (Nityā) and so on.

TANTRĀLOKA

(See Sanderson 2006: 70-71 for locations of these names in the sources and an
alternative translation).
Consciousness shines in its (all its) plenitude by the realisation that it is this
(all-encompassing) totality of (all) its powers. And the powers (of the Lord) are
numberless. Indeed, how much can be said (about them)? These powers are the
universe. How can they (all) be taught (in the scriptures)? (However,) everything is

summated in (just) three (of them). (One is) the venerable Supreme (parā) power, by

means of which the Supreme Lord sustains, perceives and makes manifest this (entire
reality, comprised in the thirty-six principles (tattva) beginning with) Śiva up to Earth,
(in a state of oneness) as just (pure) inconceivable consciousness. (The second one is)
His venerable Middling (parāparā) power, by means of which (He makes the same
reality manifest) as a unity along with diversity (bhedābheda), as are (images reflected
in a) mirror (devoid of mass and measure), as happens, for example, with the reflected
image of) an elephant. (The third is) His venerable Lower (aparā) power, through which

(He makes all things manifest, whether subjects or objects, in the modality in which
they are) mutually distinct from one another, that is, as separate (and divided)
(bhedena).

(AII three are the one) Goddess, namely, the venerable Parā, Who, embracing

this three-fold contemplation (dhāraṇa) within Herself, consumes it within (Her)
synthetic contemplation (anusandhāna) of it. (Thus, She is also) called by such names
as the venerable Mātrṛsadbhāva (the Essence of (all) Subjects) and Kālakarṣiṇī (the
Destroyer of Time).
Each one of these four energies (Parā, Parāparā, Aparā, and the Goddess
Parātītā, identified with Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī,) are each, by virtue of the freedom (of

consciousness), of three kinds in emanation, persistence and withdrawal, and so they are
twelve.

1) Initially (as Sṛṣṭikālī), consciousness generates (kalayati) the (potential)

inner existence (of the object within the initial impulse to manifestation which marks the

state of the emanation of objectivity — prameyasṛsṭi). 2) Then (as Sthitikālī), it generates

(the object) in a clearly evident manner externally also, (in the state of the persistence of
objectivity ~ prameyasthiti). 3) Then, (as Raktakālī,) assuming a state of attachment

(towards objectivity in the phase of its retraction into consciousness ~—
prameyasaṁhāra), there (within) itself (consciousness) generates that same state (of
objectivity, but this time) with the intention of retracting it (back) inwardly (into itself).
4) Then (as Yamakālī, who operates in the Inexplicable state of the object
(pameyānakhya), consciousness) generates and consumes the (sense of)) doubt which
(instigates thought, and so) is an obstacle to the retraction of that (objectivity back into
itself). 5) (As Saṁhārakālī, consciousness) generates the aspect of Being as (the same
metaphysical) doubt (that stimulates further activity) once (the object) has been
consumed (thus giving rise to the emergence of the means of knowledge (pramāṇasṛṣti),
as the activity of the cognitive apparatus devoid of outer objectivity). 6) (Then as
Mṛtyukālī, consciousness in the phase of persistence of that state (pramāṇasthiti))
generates the agent of withdrawal as its (own) nature, (which reflects on itself as) “this
is my nature.” 7) Then when (as Rudrakālī / Bhadrakālī) it is engaged in withdrawing
(the means of knowledge (pramāṇasaṁhāra)), in generating the agent of withdrawal it
generates the condition which for some (contracted) states of being is a latent (residual)
trace (of what has been consumed), and for some (other uncontracted states) is the
(resultant) residual condition which is pure consciousness alone. 8) Then (as

Maārtaṇḍakālī, who represents the Inexplicable state of the means of knowledge

(pramāṇānākhya)), it generates the senses (that is, the five faculties of cognition, five of
action, the mind (manas) and intellect), as not different from the differentiation (kalanā)
of (its) own (subjective) nature (as the individual ego, into which they merge). 9) Then


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


(as Paramārkakālī, in the phase of the emission of the subject (pramātṛṣṛṣṭi)), it also

generates the lord of the senses, (into which the ego that controls the twelve senses
dissolves away). 10) Then (as Kalāgnirudrakālī, in the phase of the persistence of the

subject (pramātrsthiti)), it also generates (the higher) nature of the conceived perceiver
within (the domain of) Māyā (that came to the fore in the previous phase, which now
merges into the transcendental subject, which is its higher nature). 11) (Then as
Mahākālakālī, in the phase of the withdrawal of the subject (pramātṛsaṁhāra)), it

generates the perceiver, who delights in grasping the expansion (of consciousness),

intent on abandoning contraction. 12) Then (as Mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakāḹī, in the
phase of the inexplicable state of the subject (pramātaranākhya)), it also generates the

(fully) expanded form (of pure dynamic consciousness, which contains all the phases as
its innate creative power).

These twelve goddesses (are forms of) consciousness called the venerable
Kālīs, who nourish the freedom of the Lord of the Wheel, shining (variously together) in

relation to the perceivers or just one (of them), simultaneously or sequentially, two-fold,

three-fold and so on, arising and rotating (one after another) like a wheel, (manifesting)
progressively externally as (time, apparent as) the (twelve) months of the year, signs of
the zodiac and the like, and finally as the sequence (of perception) of (common objects

such as) a jar (and then a) cloth and the like.
Abhinava presents the twelve phases as the Twelve Suns of the solar Wheel of
the Twelve Kālīs in his Mālinīvijayavārtika as follows:

‘Consciousness is twelve-fold in all the fields of emanation and the rest
equally, as each one, one at a time, has three natures, and in the three, is four-fold. (Thus

initially,) consciousness generates emanation, and 2) there (individual consciousness)
becomes attached (to it and so objectivity persists). 3) (Then) it generates the destruction
of persistence, and 4) conceives doubt. 5) Having withdrawn that and withdrawn the
phenomenal aspect (bhāvāṁśa), it reflects (on its own nature) as the agent of
withdrawal, and 6) (then again,) at the end of that (having withdrawn it into
unconditioned consciousness). 7) (Then, when doubt) with respect to what is merit and

sin (is overcome, and so thought, no longer vacillating,) is neither dissolved away

(druta) nor condensed, (having enjoyed the object of enjoyment, consciousness) desires
(to expand) by virtue of its own freedom (to do s0). 8) Consuming in this way into itself
the wheel of the rays of the (twelve) senses that are the limbs of consciousness, it
withdraws the (twelve) Suns, that are the aspect of the means of knowledge. 9-12) Then
having withdrawn the aspect (of conditioned consciousness) which is the conceptually
created perceiver into the (true) uncreated Heart (of the supreme subjectivity of
consciousness), it conducts that which transcends everything into the inner
unconditioned Abode (of consciousness). It does so until, by the act of conducting that
(perceiver into the supreme state of consciousness), it conducts everything in that way
(into it).
Then it (again) generates emanation, and so on, in accord with (this) sequence.
(Thus,) this Wheel with twelve spokes operates (in this way) all the time. The

occurrence of (the twelve) months, the signs of the zodiac and the like, are just its gross

state. This Wheel (thus) arisen, which consumes the object and means of knowledge
(along with) the perceiver and (resultant) knowledge, unfolds through many kinds of
processes and their absence, by the power of (this) processless process (akramakrama),

in each place intensely.' MVV 1/935-942.

Swami Lakshmanjoo explains the purpose of the teaching of the Twelve Kālīs
as follows (KNP p. 17-19): “How can the Saiva yogi on the plane of duality, which is
Maāyā and said to be that of subject and object associated with the means of knowledge,

TANTRĀLOKA

| g%ē, 1
The goddess also resides (within the sphere of) objectivity in the
form of the (twelve) months (of the year), the signs of the zodiac and the

like." (146cd)

spontaneously attain the plane on which his own nature, which is the state of the

supreme subject, be directly perceived (svarūpaprathana)? Īt is for this reason that the

Kramastotra and other texts have explained the nature of the Twelve Kālīs which, on
the plane of transmigratory existence, is the locus of the full development
(pūrṇavibhava) of the cycle of transmigratory existence. Taking this secret teaching as
their goal, all Saiva teachers have beautifully described the way to attain the supreme
principle on the plane of the daily commerce of life where the disturbance of objectivity
(prevails). The teacher Utpaladeva (ŚSt 1/8) has said:
‘O lord, to whom are You not visible as the solitary One who abides when
objectivity comes to an end? (But) You are easily visible to (Your) devotees even when

the disturbance of subject and object takes place (on the level of daily life).”

The meaning is — O Lord! when (outer) objects such as jars and cloth cease to
exist by means
(of the practice of) yoga, who cannot perceive Your essential nature,
which abides in a state of solitary oneness? However, You are easily visible to (Your)
devotees on the disturbed plane of thought constructs, which is the state of (the
relationship between) subject and object. The point is that although the yogi
spontaneously experiences the plane which is that of the insight into his own essential

nature (and that of all things) in the state of profound contemplation (samādhi), even so,

when this yogi comes (back) to the external universe which is considered to be (his)
emergence (from that state of contemplation), every single thing appears to him as
duality, as it does to other (common) people subject to transmigration.
In actual fact, the final, ultimate level is considered (to have been attained)
when, although the yogi is on the plane of emergence (from that state of contemplation),
the expansion of insight into his own nature (continues to) take place. Then this yogi can
never fall from the state of the supreme perceiver which is the reflective awareness of

his own nature. And it is also said:

‘That mountain of duality that cannot be shattered by others even by the

thunderbolt of contemplation is contemplated and destroyed by those who possess the

strength of your devotion.”

The meaning is that yogis cannot destroy the mountain of duality, which is
hard to burst asunder even with the thunderbolt of contemplation. However, a beautiful

(auspicious) person destroys the mountain of the perception of duality even in states of
the perception of duality, by means of the reflective awareness of his own nature.
Ancient teachers have adorned this state with the name ‘the contemplation of expansion’
(vikāsasamādhī). The venerable teacher Abhinavagupta has reverently described this
state called Cosmic Bliss (jagadānanda). . … . This state of Cosmic Bliss is considered to

be much more excellent than all the other planes of bliss, such as those of the Bliss of
Consciousness and the rest (see below 5/43-52ab). This is because when this state is
attained, the yogi’s (inner state of) contemplation and (that of his) emergence from it
become one. Ancient teachers have adorned this state with the name ‘(permanent)
contemplation without emergence (from it)” (nirvyuthānasamādhi).”

1 Abhinava takes care to stress once again the solar association of the twelve Kālīs
below in 5/27ab. The cycle of the twelve Kālīs is the great cycle of time — kālacakra.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


‘And the like’ refers to (all those groups of things) that number twelve
in particular, such as the (twelve) vowels. As is said:
‘The vowels, excepting the neuter ones (r, Ṛ, 1, L), are said to be twelve.

It is said that there are twelve suns (one for each month), located on the twelve-

spoked (Wheel). The months are (accordingly) said to be twelve, and the

energies (kalā) are twelve (also).”

The point is that (consciousness) is also twelve-fold on the plane of the
object of knowledge as well. In this way, this supreme consciousness is just one,
and manifests everywhere as this and that. Thus, he says:

3 ōṁ ftraāī āferz-ātramraāīcā-7T|

īaād | g3.9 1
ata eṣā sthitā saṁvid antarbāhyobhayātmanā |
svayaṁ nirbhāsya tatrānyad bhāsayantīva bhāsate || 1A7 II
Thus, even as this abiding (unchanging) consciousness, having

made itself manifest as both internal and external reality,“ it manifests as

though it is making manifest something there (within itself) which is
different (from itself).

‘Thus’, because the situation (avasthāna) is such everywhere (here in
all circumstance) as has been established, ‘this’ supreme ‘consciousness’,

which is reflective awareness by nature (pratyavamarśātmā), ‘having made
itself manifest’ by its own glorious power, as ‘both the internal and the outer
realityʼ, that is, as subject and object etc. Even so, ‘it manifests as though it is
making manifest something there’ within itself ‘which is different (from

itself)ʼ, that is, subject and object etc., as if separate from it. ‘It manifests’ (in
this way) in the sense that this reality is proved (to be such) by everybody’s
(daily personal) experience. Although in reality supreme consciousness alone
The Year has already from Vedic times been a symbol of Totality embodied in the great
God of the Śatapatabrāhmāṇa, Prajāpati who is repeatedly eulogized as the Year.

See below, TĀv ad 4/173ab where worshipping the Twelve Kālīs in this way as the
months of the year is called saṅcārakramapūjā — ‘worship of the sequence of transits’.

‘ The verse with which this introduction to exposition of the Twelve Kālī begins also

declares, with exactly the same wording, that: ‘consciousness makes itself manifest as

both internal and external reality’ (see above, 4/122cd-123ab). In the first instance, this
is stated in order to teach that although consciousness manifests in this way, it
nonetheless persists as reflective awareness. Here it is stated to teach that consciousness
persists as consciousness also. Abhinava wants to stress this at the very outset of his

exposition. Although the cycle of the twelve phases of reflective awareness mark a
progressive merger of the domains of consciousness in the course of their arising and
falling away into unconditioned, undefinable consciousness, consciousness continues to

spontaneously manifest as all things without thereby losing its identity or suffering any
alteration in its self-awareness.

TANTRĀLOKA

manifests, and nothing else at all can manifest apart from that, even so, initially
(here) (āmukhe), by the (power of its own innate) freedom, it makes the subject

etc. manifest as if it were separate from it, and s0 it pours out twelve-fold.

Now, analysing and explaining that (twelve-fold form of
consciousness), he (implicitly) declares that this system (darśana) (i.e. Anuttara

Trika) is closely related to the Krama system (kramanayasodara).

The Four Kālīs Who Consume the Sphere of Objectivity
1) Sṛṣṭikālī— The Kālī of Creation. The Emanation of Objectivity.

tataś ca prāg iyaṁ śuddhā tathābhāsanasotṣukā |
sṛṣṭiṁ kalayate devī tannāmnāgama ucyate || 148 ||
And thus, initially, this Goddess (of cognitive consciousness), Who

is pure (and unsullied by any form), (becomes) eager to manifest
(objectivity as if it were other than herself) in this way, (and) ideates (and

“ In his Kramanayapradīpikā, Swami Lakshmaṇjoo explains that the Goddess of
Consciousness, that is, Kālasaṁkarṣinī Kālī, is in two basic states. One is her
Indescribable (anākhyā) transcendental form (‘beyond the universe’), in which Her

immanent, cosmic form is ‘contracted’, that is, withdrawn into Herself. Those who

attain this state are totally freed of all duality. The other state is ‘immanent’ (lit. ‘made
of the universe’). In this state, although the one essential, transcendental nature of all

things continues to be perceived, even so, duality in all its forms arises continuously.

Although it is generally agreed that both these states are equal, neither is greater than the

other, and the experience of the wonder of their essential nature (svarūpacamatkāra) īs
the same, even so, the immanent form is generally considered to be the highest. A verse

from the Pañcastavī puts it this way:

‘O daughter of the mountains, when you desire (to be) contracted (and
withdrawn), then you are the plane of speech and reason called the Nameless; or else if

you assume a (state of) expansion, then the host of (Your) names and forms are easily

achieved.”
Swami Lakṣhmanjoo explains that when the goddess desires to contract her
form, it means that she wishes not to be phenomenally manifest and to remain beyond
the formation (kalanā) of name and form. Her eṣsential transcendental nature cannot be
an object of speech or mind, rather it constantly recedes, as it were, far from them. The

opposite of that takes place when she assumes the state in which her nature unfolds and

expands out as all things. Then her devotees can easily attain her. In this, her immanent

state, Kālī, the Goddess of Consciousness, is divided, as it were, into twelve forms,
which make all Her countless forms manifest. (summary of ibid. p. 11-12).
’ In his commentary on the following section on the twelve Kālīs, Jayaratha refers to
the Krama system with five other names, apart from Kramanaya. These are Mahānaya,

Kālīnaya, Devīnaya, Kramadarśana, and Atinaya. Other names found in other sources
include: Kramaśāsana, Kramārtha, Mahārtha, Mahāmnāya, Mahāśāsana, Kālīnaya,
Kālikākrama, Devatānayā and Rahasyāmnāya. See Sanderson (2007: 251 n 59) for the

locations of these references.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


thereby activates) (kalayate) emanation (sṛṣṭi), is called by that name
(i.e. Sṛṣṭikālī) in the scriptures.

‘Thus’, because supreme consciousness itself manifests radiantly as
each particular subject etc., and because ‘initially (before) it manifests in that
way, it is ‘pure’, that is, uncoloured by (any) fixed form, whether subject
Each Kaālī activates or, one could say, as Sanderson does, ‘ideates’ the phase of
consciousness in which she dawns. Five meanings of the root kal, from which the verb I
loosely translate in this way are derived, are noted in the standard list of Śanskrit roots
(dhātupāṭha). These are: casting forth (kṣepa), knowledge (jñāna), enumeration
(saṁkhyāna), movement (gati) and sound (nāda). Abhinava explains these meaning
from the perspective of the activities of the Twelve Kālīs below in 4/173cd-175.
Although all these meanings in general denote the activity of the Kālīs, some apparently
denote those of particular ones more specifically. In this case, it is ‘casting forth’

(kṣepa).

!° Noṭe that, as they are secret, Abhinava takes care to avoid naming the Kaāḹīs directly.

Instead, he alludes to their names by describing their function and activity, as is

implicitly understood from the meanings of the root kal from which the name Kālī is

derived (see below 4/173cd-175). We will see at the end of this passage that the Twelve
Kālīs are all manifestations of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī Kālī (TĀ 4/176).

! The scripture to which Abhinava is alluding is the Kālīkulakrama, that Jayaratha

calls the Devīpañcaśatika, quoting the relevant passages in full. Swami Lakshmanjoo
explains (KNP p. 21-22) that the Twelve Kālīs are twelve ‘expansions’ (vikāsa) of the
Goddess of Consciousness. The first one is Sṛṣṭikālī — the Kālī of Emanation. Swami

Lakshmanjoo explains: “What is meant by the state of emanation? In simple words one
can say about it that when I perceive anything by means of (the sensations) of sound,
touch, form, taste and smell, I am attracted towards it. In the first moment, I experience

the manifestation of that entity only in a form free of thought constructs. This
manifestation free of thought constructs is called ‘the initial perception’

(prāthamikālocana). When consciousness is directed towards an entity and the object
begins to be perceived, then in this first flow (of consciousness), consciousness only
perceives the nature of the object free of thought constructs devoid of (any) notion of
(its) name and form. In that state the perceiver has no conceptual (savikalpa) knowledge
such as ‘T am seeing, I am speakingʼ. There is no perception in that state of (for

example) a jar or a cloth in the domain of objectivity and relative distinctions of the
senses in the domain of the means of knowledge. All that manifests is the nature of

consciousness, free of thought constructs and beyond description, devoid of notions of

limiting adjuncts, such as that of location and the like. The nature of this state has been
beautifully described in the Yogavāsiṣṭha as follows:

‘We worship the Self, which is the vision of the first (moment of)

manifestation having abandoned the perceiver, perception and the object of perception
along with (their) latent traces.”
The meaning is that having abandoned the perceiver, perception and the object

of perception along with (their) latent trace we worship only the Self, which is the light

(of consciousness) free of thought constructs, that arises in the form of the initial
perception. (Seeing things) from the point of view of ultimate reality, the ancient
teachers have adorned this state free of thought constructs, which is that of initial

perception, and that has as its fruit the consumption of the cycle of time, with the name

of the goddess Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. In texts such as the Kramastotra, this state is described
under the name Sṛṣṭikālī. The yogi who repeatedly contemplates this state experiences

the ultimately real and supreme goddess in every external action.’

TANTRĀLOKA

(object or any of) the rest, and is this supreme ‘goddess’ of consciousness

(saṅviddevī), who is called the venerable Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī." She shines
(perpetually in this form), greedy to devour the stain of the procession of time

(kālakalanā), and ‘is eager’ there to manifest in that way by (the power of
Her innate) freedom (everything) which, though not separate from Her own
nature, is (in the process of) being separated from it, and so, (filled) with the
desire to emit, She ‘ideates (and thereby activates) emanationʼ; that is, She

contemplates (the existence of) phenomena that (are just) as if (faintly)

indicated (āsūtrita) externally. Thus, She ‘is called by that name’ in accord

with (Her) nature (anvartha), namely, the venerable Sṛṣṭikālī (the Kālī of

Emanation), ‘in the scriptures’ such as the venerable Pañcaśatika." This is
the meaning. As is said there:

‘Arising from Mantra,™ Her form Emptiness (vyoman), and located

in Emptiness, She is devoid of Emptiness. She is everything,“ and free of all

‘’ For a description of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, see below 15/335cd-338.
’’ The twelve Kālīs are aspects of the one Kālī, namely, Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī (the Attractress

of Time), Who is the Goddess of Consciousness. Kālī is the Goddess of Time. The word
for time — kāla — also means ‘death’. The relentless march of time marks the progressive
decay of things and ultimately, their end. As the Goddess Time, Kālī consumes, that is,

‘eats’ and ‘gobbles’ everything up in this way. This is the reason why She is sometimes
portrayed with Her tongue extending from Her mouth, engaged in ‘licking upʼ the

worlds. Indeed, one of the many forms of Kālī is Lelihānā, She Who Destroys by
Licking. But She also destroys Time and Death (see below, 15/335cd-338). Thus She is
said to eat up Bhairava, Her consort, Who is Time. In this aspect, She is Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī,
the Goddess of the Krama. What Jayaratha is saying here about the first Kālī is not
specific to Her. Every Kālī is Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. We will see throughout the exposition of

the Twelve Kālīs both their individual identity coupled with this, their universal nature.

Here in this very first moment of emanation, objectivity is still deep within

consciousness, at one with it. But it is just beginning to emerge as the content of the

initial intention to emit it. It is thus just a faint trace, as the object of the intention of
consciousness. This is the state of ‘expansion’ or ‘opening upʼ (unmeṣa) of
consciousness to its cosmic form. In Pratyabhijñā terms, this is the level of the principle
of Sad
corresponding to the experience of consciousness in the form of the
reflective awareness, ‘l am all this universe’, which is one with it, and hence as yet

externally unmanifest, just ‘indicated’. It is like the object of one’s desire at the instant
the desire arises.

Throughout his commentary on Abhinava’s exposition of the Twelve Kālīs,

Jayaratha quotes the Devīpañcaśatika (i.e. the Kālīkulakrama) and Kramastotra in
parallel. Manuscripts of the former have been recovered in Nepal, on the basis of which

the text quoted here has been edited by me where required (see bibliography). The latter

has unfortunately been lost, as has Abhinava’s commentary on it, called the Kramakeli
(the Play of the Krama).

The MSs of the DP read mattodayā ʻarising from inebriated delight’ for mantrodayā
‘arising from Mantra’. We are told at the beginning of chapter five of the DP that the
Goddess, who is speaking in this Tantra to the god, is the Sun of consciousness, who
assumes twelve forms as her rays. The DP describes thirteen Kālīs. The thirteenth, who

is Mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakālī, is in the middle of the other twelve, who originate
from her. Thus, the one Goddess both precedes the beginning and is at the end of the


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


things, She destroys emanation in all this universe. That energy (kalā) whose
glorious power (vibhava) is all things, and capable of serving as the instrument
of emanation, inwardly attains tranquillity, is known as Sṛṣṭikālī.

Similarly, (it is said) in the venerable Kramastotra also:


-r̥ çoṉṣṭantly worship Sṛṣṭikālī, Who is the wave (ūrmi) of dense

(uninterrupted) bliss of the Ocean of Energy (kaulārṇava) and contains inwardly

end. Here the goddess says that the first Kālī, the Kālī of Emanation, arises from her
Mantra body.

“ The word I translate here as ‘emptiness’ is vyoman, which literally means ‘sky’.
There are several words for emptiness. This one and its synonyms (for example, kha,

ākāśa and gagana) appear in quite common expressions such as cidvyoman, cidākāśa,
and cidgagana, all of which mean ‘the sky (or void) of consciousness.’

The MSs of the DP read samā ‘equal’, which is a possible variant.

‘ DP 5/23cd-25ab. In the MSs of the DP, this line reads: yasyānte śamate sā tu sṛṣṭikālī
tu sā smṛtā | `“within which (or ‘at the end of which”) She becomes tranquil ... At first

sight it appears to be a contradiction that the Kālī of Emanation should be the Kālī who
destroys it. But this is not so. The Kālīs are all aspects of the one Kālī, who is engaged
in consuming everything by withdrawing it into herself, and so making it one with Her.
In this perspective, each Kālī is an aspect of this process. Throughout this account,
Jayaratha refers to the Kālīs in each group of four as ‘devouring’ or consuming it into
the Void of the pure consciousness of the Inexplicable. Moreover, emanation follows in
the wake of destruction. Each new moment emerges from the emptiness of the cessation

of the previous one. All that consciousness contains is the void of consciousness, which

is all things.
- Sanderson (2007: 57 n 178) notes that Śrīvatsa (c. 12 century South Indian)
comments on the Kramastotra in his Cidgaganacandrikā. Jayaratha has no knowledge

of this text or indeed any other Krama or Trika based text written in South India. If he

had, he may well have quoted it. Accordingly, the corresponding verses in that CGC for
each verse of the Kramastotra will be noted and translated. Thirteen Kālīs are presented

in the CGC in the sequential order in which they are normally found in the scriptural

sources, thus confirming that this was the order in the Kramastotra also. The verses of
the Kramastotra and the CGC are set in Indravajra. This metre consists of eleven

syllables for each quarter, distributed as follows: —— u | -u l u —u | —|

The following four verses in the Cidgaganacandrikā comment on this one.
This verse comments on the 1 quarter — kaulārṇavānandaghanormirūpām — ‘(You are)
the wave (iirmi) of dense (uninterrupted) bliss of the Ocean of Energy (kaulārṇava):
yat kulaṁ trividham amba tad bhavo yaḥ prakāśa upalakṣyate mahān |
tatra yo nikhilakalpito ʻrṛṇavas tvaṁ yad ūrmir asi kṛtyalālasā || 221 I|
‘O Mother, the threefold Kula (of creation, persistence and destruction) is
phenomenal (fettered) existence, which is perceived (by the wise) to be the Great Light.
There, the ocean fashioned from all things is You who are the Wave (of its activity),

which is the ardent desire (to perform Your worldly) functions (kṛtya).

This verse comments on the 2 quarter ~ unmeṣameṣobhayabhājam antaḥ | —
‘contains inwardly (within Herself) the unfolding (of the universe when She opens Her
eyes) (unmeṣa) and (its) withdrawal (when She closes them) (nimeṣa).”
unmiṣan nimiṣad apy uta dvayaṁ viśvam etad udare dhṛtaṁ yayā |

TANTRĀLOKA

(within Herself) both the unfolding (of the universe when She opens Her eyes)

(unmeṣa) and (its) withdrawal (when She closes them) (meṣa) — She Who
merges (and, at rest, dissolves away) into the Abode of Energy that has merged

sā tvam amba laharī śivāmbudheḥ kṣepasaṁprakaṭanagrahonmukhī |
‘She who holds the universe within (Her) belly even as (She) unfolds (as the
universe, opening Her eyes) (unmiṣan) and withdraws (it, closing them) (nimiṣat), or the
two (together), is You, O Mother! (You who are) the wave of Śiva’s ocean, intent on
casting forth, manifesting and laying hold (of it with each act of perception).
These two verses comment on nilīyate nīlakulālaye (>līnakulālaye) yā — ‘She
Who merges (and, at rest, dissolves away) into the Abode of Energy that has merged
(into Śiva).
yaḥ paro nirupasargataḥ paraḥ syãn mahãn api ca kevalaḥ śivel
uttaraṁ ca viṣayotsavas tad ānanda ullasati cidghanāsi yat ||
viśvasaṁhrtipade layojjhite līyase yadi niraṁśataḥ śive |
sṛṣṭikāly asi yayā bahiḥpade kṣiptam amba jagadāśu gṛhyate ||
‘O Śivā! He who is supreme, free as He is of misfortune, being supreme is
great and free (kevala), and subsequently is the festival of the objects of sense. The bliss
which (thus) pours forth is You who are dense (unbroken) consciousness.
O Śivā, if devoid of parts, You thereby dissolve away into the plane of cosmic

withdrawal, devoid of dissolution, (then) You O Mother, are Sṛṣṭikālī, who having cast
the universe into the outer plane (of existence, You) quickly lay hold (ofit and withdraw
it again).

“ The term ‘ārmi’, meaning literally ‘wave’, is one of several synonyms of ‘spanda’,

the pulsation or vibration of universal consciousness (see below, 4/184). A vibration or
pulsation has two phases — expansion and contraction. The Spandakārikā equates them
with opening and closing of Śiva’s eyes, by which the universe is created and destroyed.

Following the Śākta view which is expressed here, for example, some commentators
add that this is the pulsation of Śiva’s energy, not Śiva Himself. Concemning the nature
of Spanda in relation to Śakti as explained by the commentators on the Spandakārikā,

see Dyczkowski 1992a: 50 ff.

The printed text reads: nīlakulālaye, which literally means ‘in the abode of the blue

Kula’ or ‘in the blue abode of Kula’. Without any immediate apparent meaning, this

reading is most probably corrupt. The emendation ‘līnakulālaye’ (‘the abode of Kula

that has merged’) is confirmed by the reading of this verse in the CGC (v 224, quoted
above in note 4,486). The term Kuḷa has a number of meanings. One is simply Śakti, i.e.

Śiva’s spiṅitual energy, which is the one I have chosen. As Kula means ‘familyʼ, and by
extension ‘group’ʼ, it may also mean the ‘group of energies’, which in this context may
be the energies of the senses (see below ad 29/4 for definitions of the term). Silburn

apparently understands it in this way, and translates the sentence as ‘she who rests in
latency in the undifferentiated receptacle of the sensory world'.

Swami Lakṣhmanjoo, accepting the reading as it stands, understands ‘the blue
abode of Kula’ to be the sphere of objectivity. Accordingly, he explains this verse as
follows:
‘The meaning is that the Goddess of Consciousness, who is the supreme
perceiver, is the wave which is the first pulsation (of consciousness), as she is the plane

of the initial expansion (of consciousness) of the (Ocean of) Energy, that is, the ocean of
Śiva who is supreme consciousness. In this way, she expands and contracts within Her


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Having defined in this way the nature of emanation in relation to the
object of knowledge, (now) in order to define the nature of (its) persistence as
well, he says:
2) Raktakālī— The Red Kālī. The Persistence of Objectivity.

JTftTĒĀTI
TT TTĪS FGTTṀT I 28 |
tathābhāsitavastvaṁśarañjanāṁ sā bahirmukhī |
svavṛtticakreṇa samaṁ tato ‘pi kalayanty alam || 149 ||
sthitir eṣaiva bhāvasya + k 5 s sx

Then that (same consciousness) is extroverted, and capable of doing

so (alam), activates (a sense of delight that) colours (rañjanā) the (various)
aspects of reality made manifest in this way, together with the circle of its
own (sensory) functions. This alone is the state of persistence of

(phenomenal) existence. (149-150a)

‘Then’, after the dawning of the venerable Sṛṣṭikālī, ‘that’ supreme

consciousness itself, at one with the subject, is ‘extroverted’; that is, rests on
the plane (daśā) of the means of knowledge (pramāṇa) by (the power of) its

inner nature. She is the goddess who abides as the initial perception ‘in the blue abode

of Kula’, that is, the category of the object of perception consisting (of empirical

entities) such as a jar or cloth. I constantly worship the goddess Srṣtikālī, that is, 1

penetrate into the supreme nature, making my own state of limited subjectivity
secondary with respect to that of supreme consciousness.” (KNP p. 23)


Swami Lakshmanjoo (KNP p. 23-24) explains the nature of this Kālī as follows:


‘when that same supreme consciousness discussed previously has become propense (to
perceive) phenomena such as a jar or a cloth and (so) becomes extroverted, that is when
it is said that this goddess Kālī enters, by virtue of Her unfettered freedom, the
state of
persistence — which is that of the means of knowledge — with respect to the object of
knowledge. When this happens (the goddess of consciousness) is ‘coloured’ (rakta), that
is, delighted by the aggregate of the objects of the senses, namely, form and the rest, of

the sense of sight and the rest of the senses. Even when the Goddess of Consciousness,

who is the supreme subject, is engaged in experiencing the objects of the senses, she
makes that perception (jñāna), which is the delight elicited by phenomena

(padārtharañjana), directly apparent as her own nature. In other words, when objects
are perceived, this supreme goddess experiences the (pleasing) attachment (rakti), which
is the enjoyment of the objects of the senses, as a state free of thought constructs, in the

course of which she manifests the second state of the expansion of Her own nature. The
venerable teacher Utpaladeva has described this state in the following verse (ŚSt. 13/8):

‘May we be mad with inebriation even as we drink constantly from the goblets

of all phenomena, the alchemical potion which is the wine of your worship through the
mouth of each one of the senses.”

TANTRĀLOKA

own (innate) freedom. (It then activates) ‘the circle of its own (sensorial)
functionsʼ, that is, the perception of form and the rest associated with the eyes

etc., and ‘together with’ that ‘reality’, which is all (that is perceived by them)
and ‘made manifest’, as (if) separated off ‘in this way’ (from consciousness),
‘capable of doing so, activates (a sense of delight that) coloursʼ (them), that

is, brings that about as its own field (of operation) also (ātmaviṣayatayāpi), ʻfor
the (various) aspects’ (of manifest reality), form and the rest, in accord with

the words (of the scripture) that ‘this group of five (objects of sense), form and

the rest, is the extent of the universe (of experience).’" Knowing it (in this way

initially) in the modality (of perception) which is free of thought constructs
(avikalpavṛttyā), the subject itself manifests in (its) extroverted form as the
means of knowledge. (However,) as all agree, the means of knowledge is
coloured by (its) object, and so through that, (the subject) also is coloured by the

object of knowledge.” The point is that (it is not affected by the object)

directly. ‘This alone is- the state of persistence’ (srhiti) of phenomena
We have noted already that the means of knowledge is that aspect of consciousness

which makes its objective aspect known to the subjective one. The objective aspect,
which was in the process of being generated in the previous phase, now reaches a more
concrete state of stability. This takes place when it comes to be known as an outer object
by the senses. This is how the means of knowledge operates in the objective sphere. In

the previous phase there is intention, an intense desire but without yet any clearly
defined object. For the initial emissive state to be consolidated, the object of desire must

be known and identified. For this to take place, the senses must be set into operation and

be directed to their object. This is possible when the perceiver pays attention to the

object out of interest, attachment or delight (all meanings of the word ‘rakti’). This
phase of consciousness induces this generic desire in the subjective aspect, which thus

turns its attention away from itself to the objective aspect, which although essentially its

own nature, begins to be perceived as separate from it, but is not yet so. The five senses
set into operation their corresponding five types of objects, that appear as manifestations
of consciousness in a universal, indeterminate manner, as yet unspecified by the
formation of thought constructs. These ‘colour’ the means of knowledge, that is, sensory
awareness, giving it a generic form as, for example, visual or auditory sensory

awareness which in turn ‘colours’ the perceiver, defining its identity as the perceiver of
form or sound and so on. Thus, the objective aspect of consciousness begins to assume
an external state which is ‘stable’ or ‘persistent’ but is still one with the perceiver. The

processes that take place within the perceiver, that is, those of emanation and

withdrawal and the encompassing fourth state which includes all of them, are not states
of persistence. Objectivity has no independent existence in itself. Objects are objects of

knowledge and so can exist as such only when perceived. The aspect of the cognitive
process that knows them is the same as that which gives them apparently ‘stable’
independent existence as objects of knowledge. Thus, the sense of ‘activate’ (kalayati)
here is the second meaning of the root kal, namely, ‘knowledge’. In other words, the
activation of this state takes place by knowing all that manifests within consciousness
directly in a manner free of thought constructs, that is, generically, as the aesthetic
delight of consciousness that ‘colours’ the perceiver and the perceived.

1 SBUM 2ab. The complete verse is quoted above in TĀv ad 3/4, see note there. This
line is also quoted below in TĀv ad 4/221cd-222ab. The context tells us that what is

meant here is that the world of sense objects has no innate nature of its own. It is all a

manifestation of consciousness.

2 Ṟead meyoprañjanaṁ for moyoprañjanaṁ.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


(bhāvajāta), such as the form (perceived by the sense of sight) and the rest (of
the objects of the senses). The meaning is that (this is) their manifest state
(vyakti), which is (their) nature as manifestations (avabhāsana) (of
consciousness). The object of knowledge is nothing in itself, and so its abiding
(manifest) state (sthiti) is (only) possible because of the development of the
means of knowledge. This is the sense of the word ‘alone’ʼ. This kind (of

consciousness) is (present) in the object of knowledge as attachment, and so is

called Raktakālī (the Kālī of Attachment). Thus here (in this case) also, She is

called by that name in the scriptures. This is the connection with the previous
(verse). That is said in the venerable Pañcaśatika:

‘That energy (kalā) which has arisen inwardly, that cannot be grasped
by the eye, nor is it present in any of the senses, and (although) devoid of
(phenomenal) qualities and is free of ego, colours (with attachment the entire)

circle of the universe, should be known to be Raktakālikā.

So too in the venerable Kramastotra (we read):


"-] bow to Raktakālī (the Red Kālī) Whose form is all things, She Who

is reddened (with passion) when the (period of cosmic) dissolution ends (and

The word ‘rakta’ means both ‘red’ and ‘attached’. Thus, the Kālī Who is red is the

Kālī Who governs and makes manifest the attachment to the objects of the senses, due
to which we pay attention to them, so that their manifestation persists within the field of
the senses. Again, the word is derived from ‘rañjana’ ʻto colour, which in a technical
sense means ‘to make manifest. This phase of consciousness hypostasized in this Kālī,
‘coloursʼ, that is, ‘makes manifest” the objects of the senses by directing the senses to
them, impelled by an attachment for them.

The MSs read kalānta which 1 read as kalānte in place of kalā tu.

The reading of the MSs here is sarvamaṇḍalam ʻthe circle of all (things)?.
’ DP 5/29-30ab. As Jayaratha himself tells us further ahead, the sequential order of the
Kālīs presented by

Abhinavagupta has

been changed with respect to

the

Devīpañcaśatika and the Kramastotra, both of which follow the basic order found in the
scriptures. The sequence recorded in the Dvyardhaśatika, quoted further ahead, places

Raktakālī in the fourth place, after the phase of withdrawal. This is the state that

Devīpañcaśatika is describing, namely, the Inexplicable, after the phase of withdrawal.
Viewed in this way, the verse makes sense.


The following two verses in the Cidgaganacandrikā comment on this one:

svairakhelananiveśitāḥ śive ātmaṇākṣarucayas trayodaśa |
arthapañcakamayāś ca vedakās tvaṁ vinītaghanasāramūrcchitā ||
bhakṣayanty akhilam akṣajaiḥ śive śaktiraśmibhir imāś ca mātṛbhiḥ |
tāś ca saṁsmr̥timahālaye pare rajyantī harasi viśvavigraham |l

‘O Śivā, the thirteen lights of the senses are placed by themselves (on their

objects) to play freely. Made of the five (gross elements that are their) objects, they
inform You (of their nature), (whereas) You (are ever pure and unaffected like a radiant
white) heap of crushed camphor.
O Śivā, devouring these (functions of the senses) with the Mothers who are the

rays of energy born of the senses, (You consume) everything, and (thus consumed)

make them shine (coloured with desire) in the supreme, great abode of recollection

TANTRĀLOKA

creation begins), She Who is attached to drinking the essence (rasa) of the

blood of the most excellent Heroes, who offer it with great delight to the Circle

of the Mothers.’

(where) You remove the form of all things (making it one with Yourself).’ (230) Read
rajyantī for rajyaī.

“ As Raktakālī is the fourth Kālī in the Kramastotra as it is in the Devīpañcaśatika, it
makes sense that in this verse She is said to operate when the period of dissolution ends.

In this verse, a third meaning of the word ‘rakta’ is to be understood, namely, blood.

Thus, Raktakālī is the red Kālī of attachment and blood. This verse refers to a common
practice which is well known to the Tantras that focus on the worship of Bhairava and
the goddesses like Kālī associated with him. This is the practice of offering one’s own
blood to the Mothers. Their worship is attested in the Siddhānta Āgamas, but are

especially important in the Bhairava Tantras that developed from about the sixth century
onwards. There they are a group of eight arranged in the directions. Associated with

them are as many ‘families’ — Kulas of deities. In this verse, Kaula adepts, ‘the most
excellent Heroesʼ, are portrayed as making offerings of their own blood to the Maṇḍala
of the Mothers and the Blood Red Kālī, who is, one may surmise, in the centre of their

maṇḍala, as the one who in actual fact receives this offering and delights in it.
Another parallel is suggested on the authority of the ŚSū (1/11), where we read
that ‘the Lord of the Heroes is the enjoyer of the three (states of waking, dreaming and
deep sleep). The commentators on this sūtra understand the Lord of the Heroes (vīreśa)
to be the universal consciousness that governs the senses. The senses are appropriately
called ‘Heroes’ (vīra), a term commonly used to denote Kaula adepts, because their

union with their objects epitomizes the union of accomplished Kaula adepts (siddha)
with their consorts, the Yoginīs.

Accordingly, we can also understand this verse to be

referring to the activity of the senses. In this perspective the ‘essence’ of their ‘blood’ is

the reflective awareness which is the essence of the energies of the senses. It is offered
to the Circle of Mothers, who are often identified with the senses (five outer and three

inner of the mental organ) as they are, for example, in the Hymn to the Circle of Deities
in the Body (Dehasthadevatācakrastotra). Raktā Kālī is thus the modality of the
reflective awareness of consciousness that is engaged in sensory perception and,
‘passionately attached to it’, ultimately receives this offering.
Swami Lakshmanjoo (KNP p. 24) explains further: ‘the Circle of Mothers are
the host of Mothers, that is, the goddesses of the senses (karaṇeśvarī) associated with
the senses. According to the Śivasūtra: ʻthe Lord of the Heroes is the enjoyer of the
three (states), the term ‘Lord of the Heroes’ denotes the most excellent yogis. The sense

here is that the developed yogi always experiences the wonder of the fourth state (of

enlightened) consciousness in the three states of waking (dreaming and deep sleep) also.

The meaning of this verse is that those supreme yogis who are connected to the bliss

which is the wonder of Pure Knowledge when in the state of (sexual) recreation
(vinoda) become absorbed in the yoginīs in the form of the goddesses of the senses. At

the time of this kind of union, between a great accomplished yogi (mmahāsiddha) and

yoginī, that is, supreme yogis and their goddess, the goddesses of the senses really come

together in union. Such is the consciousness — here called ‘blood’ — of the Supreme

Goddess (parameśvarī) in that state. In other words, when engaged in the play of the
Great Drinking that takes place in the great congregation (mahāgosthī) of Siddhas and

Yoginīs, they are always intent on that. It is also said (in the scriptures):

‘(lt is) Caṇḍikā (Herself) who everywhere here makes offerings (to the fire)

and repeats Mantras when (the sacrificial fire) is kindled.”


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

Now, surely, everywhere else the venerable Sthitikālī (the Kālī of

Persistence) is described after the venerable Sṛṣṭikālī (the Kālī of Emanation), as

is said in the venerable Sārdhaśatika:

‘The great wheel with twelve spokes is said to be in the form of the rays
(of Divine Light). I will tell (you) the names of the rays as they (truly) are.

(The Kālīs called) Emanation, Persistence, Withdrawal and Raktakālī, Sukālī,

Yamakālī, Mṛtyukālī, Rudra (Kālī), Paramārka (Kālī) and, after that, Mārtaṇḍa
(Kālī), Kālāgnirudrakālī and then the one called Mahākālī. Then comes (the
Kālī Whose name begins with) the word ‘mahābhairava’ followed by the word

‘ghora’ and ends with the words ‘caṇḍakālī’ (i.e. Mahābhairavaghoracaṇḍa

Kālī), which is said to be the thirteenth.’

The meaning is that when the Great Union with the yoginīs takes place, the

goddess Durgā (Caṇḍikā) (Herself) performs all the rites of making offerings to the fire
and repeating Mantras, and it is She who in this great congregation (of siddhas and

yoginīs) shines constantly. I bow to the goddess Raktakālī, who abides in a cosmic form
ever attached (and delighted) (anurakta) by the state free of thought constructs on the
plane of the cosmic expansion (viśvonmesa), which is the state of persistence that arises
at the end of cosmic destruction. The sense of the word ‘bowing’ is that of abiding in
that condition of identity with that (tanmaya).”

l These vi
correspond to verses 170cd-174 of the unpublished
Devīdvyardhaśatika. Although Sanderson (2007: 251 n 60) acknowledges that these

verses do correspond, he distinguishes the Devīdvyardhaśatika from the Sārdhaśatika as
a different text. The serial order of the Kālīs in the TĀ is: 1) Sṛṣṭikālī — The Kālī of
Creation, 2) Raktakālī — The Red Kālī, 3) Sthitini
ālī — The Kālī of the Destruction of

Persistence, 4) Yamakālī — The Kālī of Restriction, 5) Saṁhārakālī — The Kālī of

Withdrawal, 6) Mṛtyukālī — The Kālī of Death, 7) Rudrakālī (Bhadrakālī) — The Fierce

(or Auspicious) Kālī, 8) Mārtaṇḍakālī — The Kālī of the Sun, 9) Paramārkakālī — The
Kaālī of the Supreme Sun, 10) Kālāgnirudrakālī — The Kālī of Rudra the Fire of Time,
11) Mahākālakālī — The Kalī of the Great Time, 12) Mahābhairavaghoracaṇḍakālī — The

Horrific and Wrathful Kālī of the Great Bhairava.
Jayaratha changes the sequence of the verses that describe the Kālīs in the DP
(5!20-46) to make it conform with the order in the TĀ. The actual serial order of the

Kalīs in the DP is: 1) Sṛṣṭikālī, 2) Sthitikālī, 3) Saṁhārakālī, 4) Raktakālī, 5) Sukālī, 6)
Yamakālī,

7)

Mṛtyuk:
11)

8) Bhadrakālī

Kālāgnirudrakālī,

(=

Rudrakālī),,

12) Mahākālakālī,

9)

Parmārkakālī,

13)

10)

Mahābhairava-

ghoracaṇḍakālī. See below, commentary on 4/173ab, for a quote from the
Jayadrathayāmala, in which the Thirteen Kālīs are listed, for the serial order there,
which is the same as the one here in the Devīdvyardhaśatika. Jayaratha himself has

stated that thirteen Kālīs are presented in the Kramastotra in the sequential order in

which they are normally found in the scriptural sources. The sequence according to the

Cidgaganacandrikā, which comments on the Kramastotra, is as follows:


3) Saṁhārakālī, 4) Raktakālī, 5) Sukālī,
6) Yamakālī, 7) Mṛtyukālī, 8) Bhadrakālī, 9) Parmārkakālī, 10) Maārtaṇḍakāḹī,
11) Kālāgniruḍrakālī, 12) Mahākālakālī, 13) Mahābhairavaghoracaṇḍakālī.

Read yathāsthitam for yadāsthitam.
l Read sukalī for svakālī.

Devīdvyardhaśatika 170cd-174. Read udāhṛtā for udāhṛtāḥ. We may note in passing
that the following are the names of the Kālīs in the manuscripts of the
Ciñcinīmatasārasamuccaya: Kālī as the virgin goddess Kumāṁī (= Kubjikā?) is
worshipped in the middle, at ‘the end of the twelve’. 1) Sṛṣṭikālī, 2) Sthitikālī, 3)

TANTRĀLOKA

So how is it that here Raktakālī is taught after (Sṛṣṭikālī)? — is this not
contrary to the scriptures? (To this possible objection, we reply that, yes that is)
true, however, in order to hide (the correct) sequence of (the phases of)
consciousness (saṁvitkrama) (i.e. the sequential order of the Twelve Kālīs

stated) in the scripture, it is taught in a laconic and disordered way. This is just
as is the case with the Sequence of Persistence (sthitikrama) in the venerable

Pañcaśatika, following which the great teachers have undertaken the ritual

procedure (pūjākrama). Here, (the sequence) has been established (by the
teacher) according to his own arrangement (svaśayyayā) in order to conceal the

ritual procedure (pūjākrama), with reference to which the sequence of (the
phases of) consciousness (saṁvitkrama) may become well established (and
clear). Thus, even though the venerable Kramastotra proceeds (pravṛtta) in total

accord with the scriptures (that is, the Kālīs are arranged in the sequential order
given in the scriptures), in order to reveal the (true) sequence of (the phases of)

consciousness, the author™ (of the Tantrāloka) says in (his) commentary

(vivṛti) on it. after having explained the first verse of praise (dedicated to) the

Saṁhãrakãlī, 4) Raktakālī, 5) Sukālī, 6) Yamakālī, 7) Mṛtyukālī, 8) Bhadrakālī,
9) Paramārkakālī, 10) Mahāmārtaṇḍakālī, 11) Rudrakālī, 12) Mahākālī. (CMSS 7/247)

According to Jayaratha, there are two ‘kramas’ (‘sequences’). One is the sequence in

which the deities are worshipped, and the ritual procedure relating to their worship
(pūjākrama). Thus, each sphere of emanation, persistence and the rest has its own
sequence — krama — which is the ritual procedure that concerns it, that is, essentially, the
order in which the deities of that ‘sequence’ or phase of the ‘sequence’ of the entire

liturgy — ‘sequence’ — are worshipped. The Sequence of Persistence in the

Devīpañcaśatika to which Jayaratha refers is the order in which the deities of that
sequence are worshipped there.
The other parallel sequence, according to Jayaratha, is that of the phases of
consciousness that they represent (saṁvitkrama). Jayaratha is saying here that the
discrepancies between the sequential order of the Kālīs taught in the scriptures and that
taught here are because the scriptures keep the sequence from the point of view of
consciousness secret. Conversely, Abhinavagupta intends to keep the sequence

according to the ritual procedure secret, and is anyway concerned with the latter rather
than the former. In actual fact, there is little reason to doubt that Abhinava himself has

made these changes to accommodate his understanding of the Twelve Kālīs as
representations of the phases of perception. Certainly, there is no trace of the sequence

he teaches in the sources that have come down to us. If there was a scriptural authority

for it or he had learnt this sequence from someone, he would most certainly have
acknowledged his source. It is quite likely that Jayaratha himself thought this was so,
disclosing his view tactfully by unobtrusively stating that Abhinava describes the Kālīs
according to the number and order of ‘his own arrangement’. Jayaratha is very
concerned to stress that the order of the Kālīs has been altered. However, he is very
careful to avoid saying that it is Abhinava who made the change. Even so, the
distinction Jayaratha makes between a sequence in which the Kālīs are worshipped and

the sequence within which they appear in consciousness

is clearly a ploy. Sound

exegesis must be faithful to its object, although an explanation can range from being a

very brief literal one to an extensive reworking. Abhinava’s exegesis covers the entire

range. See Appendix to this chapter for the sources of the teachings concerning these

Read granthakṛtā for granthakṛtār.

Abhinavagupta wrote a commentary on the Kramastotra called the Kramakeli (the

Play of the Krama), which, unfortunately, has not been recovered. He refers to it in his


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


venerable Sṛsṭikālī, that ‘one should understand that the state (sthiti) which
follows after (Sṛṣṭikālī) is that of the venerable goddess Raktakālī’ and other
such things (ityādi). Here however, he proclaims this openly with reference to
the sequence (of the phases of) consciousness. Thus, there is no defect.

Now, having defined the nature of persistence (within consciousness) in
relation to the object of knowledge, he says (the following) in order also to
define the nature of withdrawal (of the object of knowledge within
consciousness).

3) Sthitināśakālī — The Kālī of the Destruction of Persistence.

The Withdrawal of Objectivity.

k k k k k. . . 1ā aṇṭarmukhatārasāt |
saṁjihīrṣuḥ sthiter nāśaṁ kalayantī nirucyate || 150 ||
(Thriīled by) the delight (rasa) of introversion, She desires to
reabsorb (that state of persistence, and so) activates the process of
destruction of persistence, and is called accordingly. (150bcd)

commentary on the Bhagavadgītā, which is his earliest recovered work. For details see

under the entry ‘Kramakeli’ in the Appendix dealing with Abhinava’s sources.

Swami Lakshmanjoo (KNP p. 25-26) explains: ‘Now the state of withdrawal within

the plane of the object of knowledge of the goddess Kālī is described in this, the third
expansion. After wonder, which is the perception of the objects of sense, has arisen (and

develops) up to the state of complete satisfaction with the Goddess Raktā [i.e.
Raktakālī] just described, then consciousness in the form of the supreme perceiver

(arises as the experience) ‘I have known this thing’. When (the goddess of
consciousness), once satisfied in this way, reflects on (her) introverted state, she then
makes the persistence of the object and (its) perception one with Herself and, so doing,

the essential nature of Sthitināśakālī becomes manifest. The sense is that when the

activities constituted by the enjoyment of the objects of the senses come to an end and
these goddesses of the senses are satisfied and embrace the Lord Bhairava of

Consciousness fully, she assumes the introverted state. The venerable teacher

Abhinavagupta has explained this matter in the following very beautiful words:

‘“(When the deities of the senses) are satisfied, they rest at one with God
Bhairava, the Sky of Consciousness, Who (as) their own full (and complete) (pūrṇa)

nature, resides solitary in the Heart.” (TA 3/264cd-265ab (264))

The meaning is that, when the senses are completely satisfied with the wonder

of the activity of the enjoyment (of their objects), they then assume an introverted state,

and the goddesses of the senses rest in the locus of the heart. Thus, because they are free
of craving in this way, embracing Bhairava who is completely full (and perfect), she
becomes of His same nature (tanmaya).”

TANTRĀLOKA

That same supreme goddess of consciousness desires to withdraw, that
is, make one with Herself, ‘that state of persistence’, which is the means of

knowledge otherwise called ‘attachment’ (rakti),.” ‘(thrilled by) the delight’

which is the wonder (camatkāra) of repose within Her own nature in the state of
introversion of oneness with the perceiver, (as the awareness) ‘ have known
(this) thing (arthay’˚ and so ‘activates the process of destruction of

persistence and is called accordinglyʼ Sthitināśakālī, the Kālī of the
Destruction of Persistence in, for example, the venerable Kramastotra. Thīs is

the meaning. As is said there:

l-Ḵ bow to Sthitināśakālī (the Kālī of the Destruction of Persistence),

Who, tranquil, abides in the dynamic union (saṁghaṭṭa) of the going and

We have noted already the two senses of the term rañjana, which literally means
‘colouring’. One is ‘delighting’, and hence causing attachment The other is

‘manifestation’. The idea is that manifestations ‘colour’ consciousness, just as a picture

‘colours’ the canvas on which it is painted. In a previous publication we noted that:
‘Śiva is the perfect artist Who, without need of canvas or brush, paints the world

pictures. The instant He imagines it, it appears spontaneously, perfect in every respect.
The colours He uses are the varying shades and gradations of His Spanda energy and the

medium His own consciousness. The universe is coloured with the dye of its own nature
(svabhāva) by the power of Śiva’s consciousness (citi.. Rājānaka Rāma says: “Homage

to Him Who paints the picture of the Three Worlds, thereby displaying in full evidence
His amazing genius (pratibhā); to Śambhu Who is beautiful with the hundreds of

appearances laid out by the brush of His own unique, subtle and pure energy°.”
Dyczkowski 1987: 107, SpKā vi p. 8.

The word ‘artha’ has many meanings. The two relevant ones here are ‘thing’ and
‘reality’. The former would be appropriate with reference to mundane perception, and

the latter to the recognition of the same as a phase in the cyclic activity of the reflective
awareness of supreme consciousness. When the perceiver has known the object through
the activity of the senses, he rests, content that he has known it, and then moves on to

the next one. In daily life this a common, mostly insignificant, event. But from the point
of view of the self-reflective awareness of fundamental consciousness, it is momentous,
because what is perceived is not just some ‘thing’ — it is reality itself. This phase of
reflective awareness, represented by this Kālī, is thus also an act of knowing (which is
the second meaning of the root kal). However, unlike the previous one, which was

directed to the subtle ‘outer’ manifestation of consciousness within itself, it is now

directed inwardly, back to itself as the perceiver. The direct experience consciousness

has, free of thought constructs, of itself as its contents now gives way to the direct
experience of itself as the reality that experiences it. The shift from ‘outer’ to ‘innerʼ in
this way marks the submergence of the former as the latter emerges. Abhinava, it seems,

prefers to refer to this state of the ‘destruction of persistence’ rather than ‘withdrawalʼ,

because clearly nothing has been emitted outside consciousness that can be said to be

‘withdrawn’ or destroyed. Objectivity is a state of consciousness, not an independent
reality. It arises and falls away within it as phases of its Being.

The name of this Kālī is generally, as one would expect, Saṁhārakālī —- the Kālī of

Withdrawal.


The Cidgaganacandrikā comments:

labdhasāmyapavanadvayāhrtaṁ vātacakram adhitasthuṣī śive |

nirgaṃmāgamamapojjhitāntare tvaṁ sthitaṁ grasasi hi sthitāmbike |

vyā śikhāntarahutāśanirgatā dhāmacakram avabhindatī kramāt |


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


coming (of the exhalation and inhalation) of the wheels of the wind (of the vital

channels of the breath of the chariot of the body), that has yoked (svīkṛta) the
two horses (of exhalation and inhalation) set out (on its journey). She by Whose

(intense) brilliance, (Fire,) the Pure One, has set.

ūrdhvasomarasapānadīpiā sāpi devi kalaye bahīḥ sthitaḥ (
‘o Śivā, having withdrawn (and thus prepared) the two winds (of the breath)
that have attained a state of equality (and balance), You preside over the wheel of the
wind. O Mother! You abide within (the centre which neither) exits nor enters, and (there
You) devour (the breath).

O Goddess, she who has come forth from the fire (that burns) within (the midst
(śikhā) progressively bursts apart the deployment of the Abodes (of
of its seven) flames
Sun, Moon and Fire) (dhāmacakra). Energized by drinking the juice of the Moon
(somarasa) (that flows from) above, O goddess, I contemplate (kalaye) (all this that
thus) abides externally.”

The Pure One (śuci) is identified with Fire in the following line (quoted in ad
3/123ab-124ab (122-123), ad 5/73ab (5/72) and ad 29/150cd-153ab): ʻFire, the Pure
One (śuci), arises by the dynamic union of the Sun and Moon.’ This line is understood

to refer to the Fire of the perceiver or the upward moving breath of Kuṇḍalinī, that is

generated by rubbing together the exhaled and inhaled breath, or by the union of the
means and the object of knowledge.

] understand this verse to be referring to the body as a chariot, which is a common
metaphor. The two wheels of this chariot are the breathing cycles (vātacakra) of the
exhaled and inhaled breath, symbolized by its two horses, that have been ‘assimilated’

or ‘appropriated’ (svīkṛta), that is, yoked to the chariot of the body. This Kālī rides on

the chariot which has set out on a journey to the sun, just as brave warriors were
believed to do when they died. The belief was that time and death are on this side of the

sun, whereas eternity and immortality are behind it. In this verse, it seems that Kālī is
praised for Her radiantly brilliant presence in the body, which is so intense that before it
the light of the sun of the objectively orientated means of knowledge seemingly sets. In

other words, in this state of withdrawal, the breaths unite and merge into the state of
higher consciousness which, from a worldly perspective, is death, but for the yogi it is a

higher life. In this perspective the ‘destruction of persistence’ marks the end of this

‘persisting worldly condition of bondage, with its ‘persistent’ cycles of birth and death,
epitomized by the cycles of the breath.

Swami Lakshmaṇjoo (KNP p. 26-29) confirms this interpretation. He writes:

‘the meaning is that that which is conjoined to the two streams of the pair of exhalation
(prāṇa) and inhalation (apāna) has ‘yokedʼ, that is subjugated to itself, the ‘wheel of the
windʼ, that is, the 72,000 channels of the breath (nāḍī). The ‘dynamic union’ʼ, that is,
junction (saṁdhi), of the entry and exit of the pair of inhaled and exhaled breaths,

namely, the coming and going of the breath in and out of the inner and outer End of the

Twelve, is the union of the pair of the object and means of knowledge, which takes
place on the plane of the subject. The goddess whose nature is the supreme perceiver

abidesin that junction. I bow to, thatis, penetrate into, that Goddess of Consciousness
called Sthitināśakālī, by whose brilliance the ‘fireʼ (ś
whichis the limited perceiver,

has set in its own essential (unlimited) nature. (Thisis the goddess) whois devoid of the

disturbance of the means and object of knowledge, that is, is devoid of the disturbance
of the exhaled and inhaled breath etc., and who is extremely tranquil in nature,

(consciousness) free of thought constructs. The venerable teacher Utpaladeva has

described this state in the following verse:

TANTRĀLOKA


So too in the venerable Pañcaśatika:


‘She is Haṁsinī" (the Gander of Unstruck Sound) and Paudgalī (the

Goddess of the Embodied Soul), Who is (subtle) like the hundredth part of the
tip of a hair. (She) is conceived (kalpate) to be in the body of all (living beings,
where She) brings about the persistence (sthiti) of creation. The Goddess Who
has arisen (thus), again merges just there (where She arises). O Maheśvara, God

of the gods, know Her to be Sthitikālī.

Having described in this way the form of withdrawal in relation to the

object of knowledge, he says (the following,

to describe) the nature of the

inexplicable (anākhya) (with respect to objectivity).

4) Yamakālī— The Kālī of Restriction. The Inexplicable State of
Objectivity.

‘A certain (undefinable) Śiva’s Night, which is the Light of the expansion of

one’s own (inner) Light, where this Sun and Moon, along with all (the stars and the) rest
set, is victorious.” (SSt 4/22)

The meaning is that Śiva’s Night, in the form of the supreme otherworldly

perceiver, is victorious in that state in which the deity of the Sun, in the form of
exhalation, and the Moon, in the form of inhalation, along with all the stars in the form
of thought constructs, set, (and that Night) shines with the expansion of the Light which
is the bliss of the consciousness of one’s own nature. Here the word ‘Śiva’s Night’
indicates the goddess Sthitināśakālī.’

Read with the MSs havsinī instead of hāsinī.

t DP 5/25cd-27ab. In this case, the sequence has been changed by Jayaratha. He

chooses to reserve the DP’s description of Saṁhārakālī, the Kālī of Withdrawal, for the
following Kālī. The reason for this appears to be that this verse refers to the withdrawal
of persistence, which is how withdrawal is understood by Abhinavagupta, who follows,
apparently, the conception of this Kālī in the Kramastotra. However, all the Kālīs are, as
explained above, engaged in ‘devouring’, that is, withdrawing duality into the
inexplicable Void of the oneness of consciousness. Moreover, Jayaratha prefers to

reserve the Saṁhārakālī — the Kālī of Withdrawal — described in the DP for the
withdrawal of the phase of the means of knowledge into the Void of consciousness (see

below, comm. 4/152). He has room to juggle the sequential order of the Kālīs around
here in this way because Abhinavagupta omits Sukālī, which in the DP comes before

Yamakālī.

l The inexplicable condition of objectivity is one of uncertainty concerning its nature,
and consequently what should be done or not. The inexplicable state of the means of

knowledge is the individual ego. The ego is considered to be an inner sense organ. It is
part of the network of the instruments of perception, and yet it operates as if it were the
subject. In other words, its condition and nature cannot be defined as either one or the
other. Finally, the inexplicable state of the subject is the pure, perfectly free awareness
of supreme consciousness, which cannot be defined specifically as a particular subject,
although it is the ultimate perceiver. See the note following the next one.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


tato 'pi saṁhārarase pūrṇe vighnakarīṁ svayam |
śaṅkāṁ yamātmikāṁ bhāge sūte saṁharate ‘pi ca || 151 1|
Then again, when the aesthetic savour (rasa) of the withdrawal (of
what has been emitted) is full (and relished completely, consciousness

spontaneously) by itself (svayam) generates" in one aspect (of the reality it

has emitted) doubt (śaṅkā), which is the restriction (yama) (of thought
constructs

concerning

scriptural

injunctions

and

prohibitions)

that

obstructs (progress, whereas in the other aspect it) withdraws (it).

The verb here is not derived from the root kal; nonetheless the process set into

operation here is the one to which Abhinava ascribes one of the meanings of this root,
namely, enumeration (sarīkhyāna). Whereas the previous two phases were activated by
‘knowledge’ (jñāna), which he defines as ‘abstaining from forming thought constructs
in relation to (this reality) differentiated in this way, ‘enumeration’ (saṁkhyāna) is (on
the contrary, the formation of) thought constructs, determined by the mutual exclusion

(of the subject and the many objects). See below, 4/174.

Concerning this doubt and its remedy, see below TĀ 12/I8ab-26ab, on the
‘Reduction of Doubt’ (kampahrāsa). Kampa literally means ‘tremblingʼ. It is the ‘angst’
that is the consequence of doubt and uncertainty.

Swami Lakshmanjoo (KNP p. 29) explains: “‘Supreme consciousness in this state of
the Inexplicable is considered to have two aspects. One is extroverted and covers over

(ācchadana) its own essential nature. The other is introverted and reveals (unmīlana) its
own nature. Only a Śaiva yogi can experience these two states (together). When the yogi

experiences Sthitināśakālī, who is the supreme perceiver, after that state in which
duality in the form of exhalation and inhalation, that is, the means and object of
knowledge, is completely withdrawn into supreme consciousness and dissolves away,
then in that supreme state, if the yogi’s contemplation (anusaṁdhāna) of his own nature
becomes even slightly loose, the (illumined) state of the Inexplicable into which he has
entered reverses into its opposite, and he begins to enter Mahāmāyā, which covers over
(ācchadana) its own essential nature (as the Inexplicable). The confused state as to what

should be done and what not, which is the result of the yogi falling from the reflective

awareness of his own nature, and the ocean of doubts (he is now) immersed in, develops

into the extroverted (state, to which he becomes subject). But the opposite of that

(binding extroverted state arises) if the yogi remains alert in that state, and he does not
abandon the contemplation of his own nature, even slightly, in accord with the teaching
that ‘Bhairava is the upsurge (and exertion of consciousness)’ (ŚSū 1/5). In other words,
if he is firmly intent on the state (āspada) which is the exertion (udyantṛtā) (of
consciousness), then as he enters into that state of the Inexplicable he enters into the
contemplative absorption of expansion (vikāsasamādhi), which is the (direct) experience
of his own (true) nature (ṣvarūpaprathana). Īt is said with the same intention in the


Spandaśāstra:


‘Then in that great sky, when the Sun and Moon dissolve away, the dullminded (yogi is cast down) into a state like that of deep sleep; the awakened, however,
remains lucid. (SpKā 25)

The meaning is that in that state in which exhalation and inhalation, or the
means and the object of knowledge, in the form of the Sun and Moon, dissolve away

completely in the Sky of Consciousness, the deluded yogi, who even though such a
supreme state presents itself, lacking (the necessary one-pointed) contemplation of his

own nature, enters the state of deep sleep which is Mahāmāyā. However, the yogi who

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Then again’ after the dawning of the venerable Sthitināśakālī also,

when ‘the aesthetic savour (rasa)ʼ, which is the subjectivity of the (state of)
withdrawal that is such as has been described, is ‘full’ and has ascended onto

the supreme flow (of consciousness), that same consciousness assumes the

plane (and condition) (bhūmikā) of the limited subject. (In that state, it)

‘(spontaneously) by itself’," by the glorious power of its own (innate)

freedom, restricts (yamayati) (consciousness) ‘in one aspect’, that is, the

extroverted one, (with the sense that) ‘this is to be done and this not’, and so
establishes (the limited perceiver in the domain of) the fixed (law of Karma)

(niyati). Thus ‘restriction’ (here means) thought (vikalpa). (Impelled and)

given life by that, this ‘doubt’ that constitutes the uncertainty which is the

bewilderment (one feels) because one does not know what to do, as the
scriptures (that should serve as guides) are endless (and inconsistent), and by
observing that there is distinction between what should be done and what not, or
even just the opposite (i.e. that what should not be done is to be done). Thus, in

accord with the saying: “‘one is subject to obstacles because of doubt

(śaṅkayā vignabhājanam), (doubt) ‘obstructs’ entry into one’s own essential
nature. (Consciousness) ‘generatesʼ that. (In other words,) it gives rise (to all
things) up to the domain of objectivity and within this second ‘aspect’, that is,

the introverted one, ‘withdraws’ (it), and shines radiantly in its own expanding
form as supreme consciousness, from which the domain (viṣaya) of injunctions
is well awake and is intent on (the practice of) the reflective awareness of his own

nature, entering that state, is forever free of the wheel of rebirth. This verse emphasises
that even though (the yogi) has reached this supreme state, it is possible for him to fall

again. Thuṣ, it is necessary for the yogi to be (intent on the practice of) the reflective
awareness of his own nature (at all times, and) not be devoid of it at any time.

In the previous phase, objectivity is withdrawn into the pure subjectivity of
consciousness.

Merged

in

consciousness,

objectivity

dissolves

away

in

the

overwhelming, consuming wonder of its beauty. The experience of the beauty of things
is not in the things themselves. The sense of wonder we feel when we perceive a thing
of beauty and marvel at it is the hallmark of consciousness. The object becomes one

with the perceiver, and divested of objectivity, is unconditioned consciousness. The

flow of its inherent reflective awareness now fully directed only at itself relishes the
wonder of its aesthetic savour (rasa). This wonder, free of all thought constructs, is the

very life of consciousness. The object, devoid of it, is dead and inert. The process would
come to an end here, were it not that the means of knowledge — the mind, senses and
with them the ego — has still to be absorbed into consciousness. Until that happens, rest

within consciousness cannot be total, it can only last for a certain period of time.

Inevitably, consciousness will again form itself spontaneously into a limited subjectivity

set in relation to its object. Thus, the aesthetic delight of consciousness recedes, to be

replaced by enquiry, with its accompanying thought constructs. Even so, the essential,
unconditioned nature of consciousness, with its higher subjectivity, free of objective
referents, remains as the inner aspect of the outer extroverted activity directed at the
object which generates thought. Thus, vacillating from one to the other, namely, the
‘inexplicable’ which generates the thought constructs of doubt, and the Inexplicable

beyond all doubts, consciousness is constricted into a limited state of subjectivity. It is

thus overcome by the thought constructs and doubts that are the consequences of

Karma, to then be graced again by the vision of oneness that removes the doubts and
with it that limited subjectivity.

Below 12/24d.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


and prohibitions brought about by the contraction (of consciousness imposed)

by the fixed (law of Karma) (niyati) has fallen away. Thus, like the saying: “just

as the genitals of a mare pulsate when it urinatesʼ, (consciousness is both)
contracted and expanded, and so (in this phase, it is inexplicable,) because, as it
has no fixed (niyata) form, it cannot be explained. As before, this implies that
She Who sets into operation (kalayantī) the restriction (of thought constructs

and doubt) (yama) is called (accordingly) Yamakālī. That is said in the
venerable Pañcaśatika:

“Yamakāḹī is said to be (the Kālī) within which the energy (kalā) that is
present in the essential nature of the restraint (of injunctions and prohibitions),

and in the essential nature (of reality which is) beyond form, dissolves away.’

So too in the Kramastotra:


"[ bow to the Kālī Who, out of passion for the joyful sport of the

Great (feast of) Consuming (mahāgrāsa) (all things), retracts (towards Herself

l Cf. below, 5/58cd-60ab. The fourth condition — the Inexplicable — in the domain of

objectivity has two aspects, both of which are ‘inexplicable’. The two aspects
correspond to the extroverted and introverted states of consciousness, which alternate
one after another as long as this state continues. The extroverted aspect is, as always, the
domain of thought constructs — vikalpa. All thought constructs arise out of doubt to

some degree. Indeed, one of the meanings of the word ‘vikalpa’ is ‘option’. In other
words, a vikalpa is an option or alternative. Doubt is essentially a vacillation between
alternatives. In this case, the alternatives concern the prohibitions and injunctions taught
in the scriptures. In one sense, we can take this to mean simply uncertainty concerning
whether what should be done, as morally and otherwise correct, and what should not.

But more concretely, in the ritual context, which is the dominant perspective in Indian
ethics, the doubt concerns the actual worship of the Kālīs. A primary example of this
would be the use of the sacrificial substances prescribed in the scriptures. These are the
so-called Kaula substances (kuladravya), namely, meat, alcohol and sexual fluids
produced by intercourse (see below, 12/12-25, concerning doubt and its removal). These

are so closely connected with the worship of the Kālīs, that the anonymous author of
one of the Mahānayaprakāśas relates each of the three groups of four Kālīs to one of
these three substances. Thus, the domain of objectivity is related to the offering of meat,
that of the means of knowledge to alcohol, and that of subjectivity to sexual fluids (MP
(2 Tri) 9/35-51ab, translated in note 29,232). We need not dwell on the actual ritual

procedure. What concerns these teachers is the contrast between the two domains of
consciousness, one engaged in generating thought constructs (‘alternativesʼ, ‘doubts)

and the other, which is free of them. Both phases are the ‘inexplicable’. The former
because thought beset by doubt does not reach a conclusion and so cannot articulate a
final certain conclusion (niścaya). The latter simply because it is free of thought, and so,

beyond conceptualization, it cannot be ‘explained’. Jayaratha tells us indirectly by
quoting this verse, which elsewhere serves to describe Kramamudrā (see notes 4,427,

446 and 5,105), that in this phase, this is the yogi’s practice. When the attention of an
undeveloped yogi is tumed to the outer world, he is plunged into thought. When he

faces the opposite, inward direction, that is, the inner sphere of subjectivity, he is freed

from it. If he succeeds, by Śiva’s grace, to maintain the introverted, subjective state, and
thought concerning outer objectivity comes to an end, he moves on to the next phase,

that is, Saṁhārakāḹī, the Kālī of Withdrawal. This Kālī continues the process of
eradication of thought within the sphere of the means of knowledge, that is the mind and
its objects.

DP 5/33. Read with the MSs rūpātītā for rūpātīta.

TANTRĀLOKA

and assimilates) (saṅkarṣayantī) the essential nature (vapus) of the subjugating
restriction (yama) that restrains the withdrawal of all things, in order to regulate

(and control) the universe (jagato yamāya).”

Sanderson (2005a: pp. 112 note) translates this verse as follows: ‘I bow to (that) Kālī

who in the passion of her desire to accomplish the great reabsorption retracts the power
(vapuḥ) of the tyrant inhibition (yamasya) who impedes total withdrawal
(sarvārthasaṁkarṣaṇasaṁyamasya) so diminishīng man’s (innate vitality) (jagato

yamāya).

The CGC says this about this Kālī:


etad amba sad idaṁ tu neti naḥ śaṅkayā hṛdi vikalpalakṣaṇaḥ |

yo yamaḥ sa khalu kãlyate tvayā bhūtasaṅyamanakelikovidaḥ |
amba kāryakaraṇe niyacchataḥ pūrṇacitpadamahotsavadviṣaḥ |
jambhitasya (jrmbhitasya) hṛdaye svaśaṅkayā tvaṁ yamasya vapuṣāsi bhīṣaṇā ||

‘O Mother! ‘this (reality) does not exist’ — such is the notion (vikalpa) that
ariṣes in our heart because of doubt. (Thus) Yama (the Lord of Judgement), skilled in

the game of restraining (all) living beings, operates due to You.
One who is constrained to be (engaged) in producing the consequences (of his

Karma in the sphere of worldly activity) by his own doubt (that he harbours in his)
heart, is averse to the great festival which is the plane of full (and perfect)
consciousness. You, O Mother, are the frightening body of Yama (the Lord of
Judgement) who has unfolded (therein).”

] have translated the compound sarvārthasaṁkarṣaṇasaṅyamasya in this way. The

term ‘saṁkarṣaṇa’ literally means ‘dragging (along or towards something). The term is
commonly used in these texts (as it is in this verse) to denote the process whereby
phenomena are ‘draggedʼī towards and assimilated into the Goddess’s essential,
transcendental nature. Accordingly, the terms ‘saṅkarṣaṇa’ (= ‘drawing (together to
assimilate)) and ‘saṅyama (restraint) should be read to denote two processes. Using

the terminology of the Tantrāloka, the former is the assimilation of manifest phenomena

into consciousness, and the latter their confinement or ‘restriction’ by the rules of
causality and the like imposed on them by their phenomenality as analysed by the

thought constructs that represent them. Abhinava quotes this verse in the PTv (p. 236)

(there
we
(find
the
synonymous
reading
mahāgrāsavilāsasaktaṁ
.for
mahāgrāsavilāsarāgāt). He does so in the context of explaining that one should not
harbour doubts about the use as an offering of Kaula sacrificial substances (kuladravya),
as outlined in the previous notes. He tells us there that he has discussed this matter in

detail in his commentary on the Kramastotra, the Kramakeli. He takes up the same
theme below in Chapter Twelve in a passage (verses 18cd-26) called ‘the elimination of
doubtʼ (kampahrāsa). Clearly, whatever else this verse refers to, this is what is primarily
meant to be the object of ‘doubtʼ in this case.
Sanderson (2005a pp. 112 note) refers to the PTv, where Abhinava quotes this

verse. He does so after quoting the Sarvācāra, that commends the initiate not to harbour
any doubts or be inhibited (as Sanderson puts it) in making Kaula offerings to the deity.

Thusṣ Abhinava says (Sanderson’s translation): “So it is that the venerable teachings of
the Trika ritual is essentially this: to offer worship without the restraints (of inhibition).”

We have noted that this Kālī, in terms of Abhinava’s exegesis, embodies the state of the

Inexplicable (Anākhyā) in the domain of objectivity. In this perspective, what is
specifically meant by ‘objectivity° here in the context of worship relates to the thought

constructs generated by doubts relating to the use of these substances. This state of Kālī
consciousness serves to purify the mind of them, and so qualify the practitioner to move
on to the subsequent states of consciousness in the ongoing process of withdrawal
embodied in the subsequent Kālīs.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Thus, in this way, the group of four goddesses beginning with (the Kālī)
of Emanation, who delights in consuming (and assimilating into consciousness)
(grāsa) the objective aspect, has been described. Now (he goes on to) describe

the group of four goddesses beginning with (the Kālī) of Withdrawal, who are
skilled in consuming (bhakṣaṇa) the (four) aspects of the means of
knowledge.

The Four Kālīs Who Consume the Sphere of the Means of Knowledge
5) Saṁhārakālī — The Kāḹī of Withdrawal. The Emergence of the Means of
Knowledge.

a1ī īaUGĠ |
Tūafti ñoūdā aāīāīāī fd@TTTIT_ II QU 1

Swami Lakshmanjoo makes no reference to this. Instead he focuses his
explanation on the cognitive state of consciousness in this phase (KNP p. 29-30):
‘Conceptual, differentiated perception (vikalpa) is the ‘restriction’ (which differentiates)
all phenomena such as ‘form’ and the rest by the process of mutual negation (apohana),
such that it regulates them, that is, fashions notions (vikalpa) (of them) in a fixed
determined (niyata) form of the sort: ‘this is a jar, not a cloth’. Or else one could say
(that consciousness) maintains a state of fixed limitation (niyatarūpatā). (In which case,

it) is the limited subject who regulates thought, the nature of which is ‘restriction’. The
goddess Kālī who is the supreme perceiver ‘draws’ (together) towards herself, that is,

manifests (within herself) in this way the essential nature of both (thought and the
thinker) in order to regulate the universe by the sport of the aesthetic delight (rasa) of

(Her innate) bliss, which is great ‘joyful sport’ and the ‘Great (feast of) Devouring’. I

bow to that Supreme Goddess Yamakālī, who reveals the aesthetic delight (rasa) of the
Great Devouring and the Great Sport. In other words, dissolving away embodied

subjectivity into Her, I enter into the essential nature of Parā.

The sense of this verse is that (this goddess operates in two complimentary
ways). In one way, the one Supreme Goddess (parādevī) assumeṣ an introverted state by
the power of her unimpeded freedom, and having done so, merges all the universe (of

phenomena), consisting of thought constructs which restrict etc., into the introverted
state. Thus, by the exuberance of the aesthetic relish of the Great Devouring, She

manifests the plane of the supreme perceiver. In the other way, by her own aesthetic
delight in play, she projects all phenomena, consisting of thought constructs and the

subject who forms them etc., into an outer form, and then enjoys the aesthetic savour of

the Great Sport, and as she does so, she unfolds the plane of the limited subject. She
who delights in the aesthetic savour of both types of play (vilāsa) is considered to be
Yamakālī.’

The word ‘bhakṣaṇa’ literally means ‘eating’. The Kālīs eat up the worlds and digest
them into their own essential nature. From this point of view, the universe is a mouthful

of food (grāsa) for them, and the ‘great eating’ (mahāgrāsa) of it, is what they are
engaged in. In other words, Abhinavagupta teaches that in Śāktopāya, the Twelve Kālīs
represent the phases of the process of assimilation of the duality represented and

generated by the formation of thought constructs into pure consciousness that is free of
them, and so is unconfined (‘restricted’) by them, and is a perfectly nondual direct
perception of reality which is its own divine nature.

TANTRĀLOKA

saṁhr̥tya śaṅkāṁ śaṅkyārthavarjaṁ vā bhāvamaṇḍale |
saṁhr̥tiṁ kalayaty eva svātmavahnau vilāpanāt |/ 152 ||
Once (this phase of) doubt has been withdrawn (into consciousness,
either completely) or with the exception of the object of doubt, (the
goddess) brings about the withdrawal (of all things) in the sphere of
(phenomenal) existence, in order to consume (them) (vilāpana) into the fire

of Her own nature.

‘Once (this phase of) doubt,’ that is, restriction (yama), ‘has been

withdrawn (into consciousness completely)ʼ, ‘or’ the locus of doubt, that is,
the objects of doubt, which are those things that (one is in doubt about whether
they) should be done or not, have been set aside, that is, withdrawn (along with
it), that supreme goddess of consciousness Herself, by (her) inner activity (and

state) (vṛrti), ‘in order to consume (them)’, that is, in order to make them one
with the fire of Her own nature, ‘brings about the withdrawal (of all things)’

in all ‘ṭhe sphere of (phenomenal) existence’”" Thus She is called
Saṁhārakālī, the Kālī of Withdrawal, in the venerable Pañcaśatika and

elsewhere, and is called by that name in the scriptures. This is the distant

Swami Lakshmanjoo explains (KNP p. 30-31): “The point of attaining (and

experiencing) this play (of consciousness) is that when the yogi is in the aforementioned
state of the Inexplicable (as Yamakālī), he experiences both forms, that is, the
concealment and unfolding of its own nature. Then, by his teacher’s grace, the yogi
begins to withdraw, root and all, the extroverted modality which is the concealment of
his own (true) nature. In other words, taking the introverted plane as his support, he
dissolves away this cycle of transmigratory existence into the fire of his own (true)
nature in a state of oneness. Then spontaneously, without effort, he enters the state of
emanation associated with the plane of the means of knowledge. Entering this state, the
extroverted modality which conceals his own nature does not arise again. Thus, that
yogi enters the state which is the withdrawal of phenomenal existence into the
consciousness of his (true) nature, beyond mind, and free of thought constructs. The
teacher Utpaladeva has described this state of withdrawal of phenomenal existence in

this verse of the Śivastotrāvali:

‘Phenomena perpetually manifest to me as dissolving away into You like
pieces of cloud in the sky, and entering the purity of the process (of pure
consciousness).” (ŚSt 6/7)
This state is said to be one of the withdrawal of phenomena (bhāvasaṁhāra),
because reaching this level (koṛi), the sphere of the object of knowledge
(prameyamaṇḍala) īs totally withdrawn (into consciousness), along with the doubts that

are the perception of relative distinctions (bhedaprathā) and notions of what needs to be
adopted and abandoned.

The doubt and thought constructs of the previous state maintain the existence of

objectivity in that indefinable state. Now, with the emergence of the means of
knowledge, that doubt is overcome, and the object is more perfectly withdrawn into

consciousness. Thus, although this is the phase of emanation of the means of
knowledge, it is characterized as one of withdrawal with respect to objectivity.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


connection (with the statement in verse 148 above). That is said there (in the

Pañcaśatika):

‘The fierce (caṇḍa) Kālī, Her colour pure (black), is intent on devouring

the nectar (of phenomena).” (Called) Saṁhārakālikā, She is free of being and

nonbeing, Her nature is the withdrawal of all things and is where She dissolves

away. 5530


So too in the venerable Kramastotra:


I bow to blissful Saṁhārakālī, Who, endless and containing all

things, is the Transmental (unmanī). She Who, perpetually active (satatoditā),
in order to dawn’” as (the Goddess) void (of all phenomena), closes in on

Herself (nimeṣam eti) the withdrawal of phenomenal existence.’

Verse 148 above refers to the Kālī of Emanation. The order according to the DP

places this Kālī in the third place, and so forms a pair with the Kālī of Emanation in that
sphere. Even though Jayaratha has shifted her place to here, he refers to their original

connection, which because of this shift has become ‘distant’.
MSs Ch, Ṅ, and T read -grasanoditā — arisen to devour (the nectar (of
phenomena)).
ḌP 5/27cd-28.

! The Cidgaganacandrikā elaborates on this verse as follows:

barhino ʻṇḍarasavad yad antare śābdataḥ prabhṛti citritāsanam |
arthapañcakam asau tvam unmanī sandhipārvapadakalpaghasmarī | 227 1
ātmabhāvam akhlasya jagmuṣī tvaṁ śive niravadhiḥ sadoditā |
bhāvasaṁhrtinimeṣavigrahā saṁhṛtaṁ kalayasi hy anāvṛtiḥ || 228 I
‘Like the juices of a peacock's egg, the five (gross) elements that (arise) from
Sound and the rest (of the five sensations) are the variegated seat within (You that

serves as the foundation of outer objectivity). That is You, the Transmental, the raging
fire that consumes the syllables preceded by their conjuction.

O Śivā, you who attain the essential nature of all things (as one with Yourself)

are endlessly ever active (sadoditā). Your form the withdrawal (nimeṣa) of the
withdrawal of phenomena, You who are unobscured (knowledge that) establishes what
has been withdrawn (as one with Your own nature).”
According to Raghunātha Miśra, who published the CGC and translated it
into Hindi, the syllables are the two that constitute SO ‘HAM, that are reduced to OM.

MSs Ch and T read sadoditām abhyudayāya for sadoditā saty udayāya.
The Great Kaula goddesses — Kālī, Kubjikā and Tripurā, are all understood to be

essentially the energy of consciousness (cicchakti) called the Transmental.

Swami Lakshmanjoo explains this verse as follows (KNP p. 31): ‘The meaning

is that by withdrawing all the aforementioned thought constructs

(vikalpa), which are

(essentially) doubts, the consciousness of the Supreme Goddess is in the form of the

Transmental. Placing all things within her own nature, She is endless. The goddess

Kālikā, as a result of Her withdrawing the entire aggregate of phenomena
(bhāvamaṇḍala) into the fire of Her own nature, abides in the condition (sthiti) of the

withdrawal of phenomenal existence. Even though She takes the support of the plane of

the exertion (of consciousness) (udyantṛtāspada) by the arising of the form (of
consciousness) which is external expansion (bahiḥsphārarūpa), She is the Void (of

TANTRĀLOKA

How does (consciousness) here (in this case) operate (kalana) with
respect to the (phenomenal) entities that are in the process of being withdrawn?

With this doubt in mind, he says:


ftrorqīftrī

TJJTId
-TNI TTṬ JGTTIĪR TRIT I 243 I
vilāpanātmikāṁ tāṁ ca bhāvasaṁhṛtim ātmani |
āmṛśaty eva yenaiṣā mayā grastam iti sphuret || 153 II
She (then) ponders within Herself on the withdrawal of (all
phenomenal) entities, and (also) that (this withdrawal) is (their)

consumption

(and

assimilation

into

Her

undivided

consciousness)

(vilāpanātmikā). (She does this) so that (the experience) may manifest

(within Her) that: “I have devoured (all this).”

The withdrawal of (phenomenal) entities is the spontaneous (svayam)
generation of (their) condition of merger within consciousness. It is the
reflective awareness (of their) oneness within consciousness that rests on the

plane of the means of knowledge by the consumption (vilāpana) of (their)
external state. Thus, this consciousness (shines as) the radiant effulgence
(sphurattā) that (reflects), ‘I have made manifest (all) these phenomena at one
within myself’. (All outer things are withdrawn into consciousness this way) ‘so

that’ʼ, as is said, ‘(the experience) may manifest that: “I have devoured (all
this).” This is emanation of the state of consciousness in the form of the means
of knowledge, (which takes place so that) it may manifest coloured by each

particular entity (which is its object).

(Now that) the nature of emanation associated with the means of

knowledge has been defined, he says (the following) in order to define the
nature of (its) persistence.

6) Mṛtyukālī — The Kālī of Death. The Persistence of the Means of
Knowledge.

frēmṝ̄r vr̥g ahrrgtszaāīṁtaā
ú gṇux 1
saṁhāryopādhir etasyāḥ svasvabhāvo hi saṁvidaḥ |
consciousness). I bow to Saṁhārakālī, who, dense with bliss (ānandaghanā), is such.
The meaning of ‘bowing’ here is, as before, that of penetration (into Her nature).”

This is how I have translated the expression ‘saṁvidvilīnatotpādanātmā’, which
literally means ‘the coming about of (their) state of merger into consciousness’.
Jayaratha concisely explains why this withdrawal takes place, namely, to make room for
new possibilities. The previous state of doubt engaged the conditioned subjectivity in

the struggle to remove it. Now freed from the restriction of doubt, consciousness is open
to further development.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


nirūpādhini saṁśuddhe saṁvidrūpe ‘stam īyate || 154 ||
The innate nature (svasvabhāva) of this consciousness, conditioned
by what is to be withdrawn (saṅhārya) (into it), sets into the completely

pure, unconditioned conscious nature.

Even when that which is to be withdrawn has been withdrawn in this
way, ‘this consciousnessʼ, as the means of knowledge, is ‘deathī (mṛtyu),

because it withdraws all things. Its ‘imnate nature’, which is its own and in all
respects unique (to itself), is unconditioned (and undivided) by those things that
should be done and those not, which are to be withdrawn. So that that should
not attain (the stable state) of persistence without resting within the
consciousness which is the aspect corresponding to its own (essential nature), it
‘sets’, as if it were an object of knowledge (prameya), into the means of
knowledge that is ‘unconditioned’, that is, untainted by this or that (particular)
entity. Thus (it merges) into the ‘completely pure conscious nature’, which is
the perceiver. There itself, the coloured (manifest) form (raktirūpa) (of
consciousness) comes to rest in such a way that its state as the agent of
withdrawal is well established.® Thus, because consciousness in the form of
death also operates (kalana) in this way, it is everywhere declared to be
Mṛtyukālī, (which is a name the Goddess of Consciousness) has received in

accord with reality (arthataḥ). That is said in the venerable Pañcaśatika:

Swami Lakṣhmanjoo explains (KNP p. 32): “Although all objectivity has been

removed, root and all, by means of Saṁhārakālī described previously, even so, a

limiting adjunct (upādhi) of objectivity continues to exist in the form of a subtle latent

trace by means of which Samhārakālī

reflects on Her own nature that: ‘I have made

manifest these phenomena (arthajāta) at one within myself.’ The goddess of
consciousness merges into the essential nature of the supreme subject when she has also

purified herself of the limitation in the form of the latent trace of the reflective
awareness of the withdrawal of phenomena in this way. Then when this, the sixth
expansion of the goddess Supreme, takes place, she brings about the arising of
Mṛtyukālī. One may ask why this goddess is called Mṛtyukālī. The answer to this
question is that this (state of) consciousness (sarvitti) withdraws Saṁhārakālī also into
its own eṣsential nature. Thus, because this goddess also devours (kavalana) death in the
form of withdrawal (saṅhāra), she is called Mṛtyukālī.”

In this phase, the means of knowledge by which the nature of eternal, immortal

consciousness is known to itself as such becomes stable by resting firmly within itself as
the true, imperishable ‘knowerʼ. In this way the limited subject, immersed in the

ignorant pride of personal agency and ego that seeks to appropriate what it can for itself,

dies, and the outer objective world in relation to which he is the subject by his own

karma comes to an end. Thus killed by the insight into the true undying nature of

consciousness of its own nature and all things, individualized consciousness ceases, and
is replaced by the eternal subjectivity, at rest within itself.

Persistence is the ‘strengthened’, intensified state of emanation. As the means of
knowledge develops, the degree of withdrawal of objectivity develops with it. Here the

state is that of the agent of withdrawal. Previously it was just emergent withdrawal and

so is more definitive. This is because, as the Kramastotra explains, it also consumes the
ego of the individual subjectivity which appropriates the object, replacing it with the

subjectivity of the agent of withdrawal. Thus it is a kind of death.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Thus She is the Mistress of Kula, Who descends (pātinī) inwardly at

the time of death. O Śiva, Arouser of the Daughter of the Mountains, (when)

Her energy, which is that of the Time of Death, penetrates the form (vigraha)
(of someone’s body), she should then be known to be Mṛtyukālī (the Kālī of
Death).”

So too in the venerable Kramastotra:


I-Ḵ bow to Mṛtyukālī, Who has arisen from timeless (eternity) — (She

Who is) the voracious consciousness that has consumed (grasta) the death of
pride, haughty with the ecstasy of the expansion (visphāra) of the host of
energies of the ego (that reflects that “this is) mine”.
Read, with the MSs of the DP, tena hy eṣā for om ity eṣā.

Read with the MSs of the DP yasya for yasyāḥ. This line is repeated two lines prior
to this one in the MSs. The second half reads praviśed dehamaṇḍale- ‘penetrates the

sphere of the bodyʼ.

DP 5/35cd-36.

! The Cidgaganacandrikā elaborates on this verse as follows:
vittadāramukhabhogyagāminī yā mamety abhimatir madoddhatā |
yāpy ahañṅkṛtir anātmani sthitā mṛtyurūāpam ubhayaṅ tavāsanam || 234 ||
viśvam amba kuruṣe śavāsanaṁ mṛtyuṣecanam akhaṇḍitodayā |
cidvikalpamayam antarudyamaṁ kālamohitajagat trayam prati || 235 1|

‘The pretence, arrogant with the madness (of ignorance), that ‘this is mine’,

associated with the object of enjoyment that originates from material wealth and (one’s)

wife, and s0 too the ego that resides in (the body and all that is) not the Śelf, are both
Your seat, (O Mother), the form of which is death.

O Mother! You make the universe into the corpse (which is Your) seat, and by

(Your) unbroken arising, (You) sprinkle (the consecration of) death on the three, that is,
the thought constructs of consciousness, the inner exertion (that projects outwards) and
the universe deluded by time.’

ṛnstead of grasto yayā, MSs Ch, N, and T read: grasto yathā.

Swami Lakṣhmanjoo explains (KNP p. 33-34): ‘The meaning is: “I have merged all

this sphere of the means of knowledge into my own nature. The aggregate of ego which

extends in this way is the ‘ecstasy” in the form of the joy of (the Goddess’s) own nature
(svātmānanda). 1t is the consciousness which is ‘death’ associated with the most
excellent pride (utkṛṣṭagarva) that the goddess of consciousness has completely
consumed (all things). I bow to the goddess of consciousness who delights in that Great
Devouring and is free of the passage of time (kālakalanā).
As this (state of) consciousness is associated with (this) most excellent pride
(utkṛṣṭagarva), it is possible that a doubt may arise that full ‘I-ness” has been achieved,

which all the scriptures agree is the state to be attained (upādeya). So what is the point

of again withdrawing this consciousness, which is full (and perfect) ‘l-ness’? In
response to this doubt, it is said that in actual fact one cannot consider the state

described in the fifth expansion to be that of full ‘I-nessʼ, because in the state of
Saṁhārakālī a subtle state of objectivity in the form of a latent trace continues to exist.
This is why in this state (daśā) there is a radiant manifestation of the reflective
awareness that ‘I have dissolved away objectivity into subjectivity (ahaṁsvarūpa)’.

Whereas, on the contrary, there is no need to dissolve away anything into the essential

nature of full (and perfect) ‘I-ness’. (Anyway, this kind of reflective awareness is not
such). On the plane of full (and perfect) ‘I-ness’ (the form of) reflective awareness is ‘I


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Once having described in this way the nature of persistence in relation
to the means of knowledge, he (goes on to) talk (about) the nature of (its)

withdrawal also:

7) Rudrakālī — The Fierce Kālī. The Withdrawal of the Means of

Knowledge.

raīī ahtraīa ca a |
TRJTTTT] TJT] TTÇṬÑHĒTGRTT-̄:
II ṞUU, I

JTRITTA]

vilāpite ʻpi bhāvaughe kañcid bhāvaṁ tadaiva sā |

āśyānayed ya evāste śaṅkāsaṁskārarūpakaḥ l| 155 ||
śubhāśubhatayā so ʻyaṁ soṣyate phalasaṁpadam |

Although the flux of phenomena (bhāvaugha) has been consumed,

in that very moment (tadaiva) that (consciousness) condenses some part of

it (kaṁcid bhāvam). Thīs persists as a latent trace (saṁskāra) of doubt
which, according to whether it is auspicious or not, gives rise (at the
appropriate time) to its fruits. (155-156ab)
am everything’ (sarvam aham) and so all that exists is ‘I-ness’ʼ, which is the essential
nature (of all things). Thus, it is reasonable, and makes sense, that Mṛtyukālī should now

be described (and realised) in order to make the consciousness, which is I-ness

associated with limiting adjuncts, enter into the I-ness which is the essential nature (of
all things) and is free of limiting adjuncts. Praising this state, Utpaladeva uttered this

verse:

‘O Umeśa, entering into Your own nature, which is unfathomable, free of
thought, nondual and voraciously (consumes) all things, I always worship and praise

You.’ (ŚSt 13/20)

The consciousness of the yogi who is on the plane of the means of knowledge

and experiences this state of persistence (also) becomes voracious (in the same way). In

other words, he always wants to eat. Even after he has eaten all kinds of food, he

continues to be always hungry. I have seen yogis who have been in this state for some
time. When they are in it, they delight in eating everything, be it vegetables, curd or the
like.”

She is also called Bhadrakālī, the Auspicious Kālī. See below, 4,555.

Swami Lakshmanjoo explains (KNP p. 34): “Although the result of merging all
phenomena into the pure consciousness of the perceiver devoid of limiting adjuncts is
withdrawal, even so this supreme consciousness which has been realised (pratipādita)
by means of its own unobstructed power of freedom hundreds of times, after having

withdrawn phenomena, and repeatedly rendered some particular (niyata) thing into a
gross form (ghanībhūta), it again gives rise to the doubt of (its) existence (independent
of consciousness) (astitvaśaṁkā). This (doubt) is (the pernicious) latent trace which

results from the persistence of the tendency on the part of (individual) perceiver to fall

into the cycle of transmigration. However, although these kind of doubts, consisting of

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Although the flux of phenomena’, that is, the product (of
consciousness), has been withdrawn in this way by coming to rest in the
consciousness of the pure perceiver who is free of limiting adjuncts, having
previously consumed it, ‘that’ supreme consciousness ‘condenses a part of it’
with a fixed (determined and limited) form; that is, even though it has been

consumed, it gives rise to a dense (gross) state as the subtle manifestation of

duality (kathaṁcidbhedāvabhāsa). That which has been condensed (in this way)
is doubt, which continues to exist as a latent trace (saṁskāra). The meaning is

that it persists as the instrumental cause (nimitta) of (doubt), due to which the
subject cannot decide what is to be done and what not, in the endless scriptures
that teach (a large) variety of practices (ācāra). And so, in accord with the view

that ʻthat which considers what is not right conduct (dharma) to be right
conduct is enveloped in darkness’, whatever and however (an intention)
develops in the heart (of his consciousness), it gives rise to the corresponding

consequence in that way. Thus, when this latent trace, which is the instrumental
cause of doubt, and is the unbeneficial restraint (imposed by the law of Karma)

as to what is to be done and what not, is awake (and active), it will give rise to

the many consequences, auspicious and inauspicious, due to which (the beings

of) this world, as subject to heaven and hell, experience pleasure and pain.
Surely (one may ask,) the subject who is in doubt in this way cannot

reach a decision about what is to be done and what not, and so (ends up) by not

following any (code of conduct) at all, so how does his (action) give rise to
consequences that are auspicious or inauspicious? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

latent traces (of past notions of the independent existence of things apart from
consciousness), arise in this state of withdrawal, which is associated with the means of
knowledge, even so, just as these doubts arise, they are spontaneously destroyed.
Bringing about in this way the division (bhedana) which is the production of latent
traces, and then dissolving (them away) (dravaṇa), which is the quelling of (these)

latent traces, Kālikā, the Great Goddess of Consciousness manifests her seventh
expansion. The Kramastotra etc. call this expansion Bhadrakālī. The meaning of the

word ‘Bhadrakālī’ is derived from the two syllables (of her name). ‘Bha’ stands for

‘bhedana’ — dividing upʼ, that is, the play of many diverse forms and ‘dra’ stands for
‘dravaṇa’ that is, the act of dissolving away the many different expansions into her own

nature.’
ṣukhaduḥkhādibhoktrṛtām iyāt lit. ‘they go to the condition of being the enjoyer of
pleasure and pain etc. — that is, these fettered beings become the worldly perceivers

who experience the pleasure, pain and other consequences of their own actions. In the
previous state of the inexplicable with relation to objectivity, the reason for the
indefinable state of objectivity was because it is either not fully known or because it

escapes the domain of thought. Here, deprived of the means of knowledge due to its
withdrawal, the latent traces of doubt and uncertainty which had not been removed
condense into thought constructs, obscured by which individualized consciousness is
again unable to reach a sure and certain conclusion. But here too, there are two

possibilities. One is to get stuck in the countless possibilities suggested by thought. The

other is to dissolve them away in consciousness by the insight that they are neither

essential nor useful. If the doubts are overcome at this stage, much progress is made.

Latent, hidden traces of doubt come to the fore, and so can be directly confronted and

overcome.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


pūrvaṁ hi bhogāt paścād vā śaṅkeyaṁ vyavatiṣṭhate || 156 ||
This doubt arises either before or after® an experience (bhoga)
(which is the consequence of Karma). (1S56cd)
Everybody here (in this world) is in doubt ‘before’ the experience of
pleasure or pain (that are consequences of their actions), because of the many
things the scripture (śruti) (teaches) should be done or not done, (thinking)

‘what is (the right code of conduct) I should follow?” According to the degree in

which their own latent traces (of doubt) are awake, some, in certain
circumstances, reach a decision (about how they should behave), and (so) by

following (a course of action), subject to its auspicious and inauspicious
consequences, experience pleasure and pain etc. (Thus,) after that, due to an

injurious blow of suffering and the like, a doubt arises (that) ‘surely I have been
doing what should not be done as to what should be done and so I am overcome
in this way by suffering’. Thus (conversely), what was done before, such as
taking recourse to a (good) Brahmin (who can perform the appropriate expiatory
rites), (can) also loosen (the hold of) this doubt at that very moment, so that it
cannot give rise to the auspicious and inauspicious fruit (normally) associated
with (one’s actions) due to the consequences of that (doubt).

He says that (in the following verse):


TaTYĀĪTTTHĪ

IEÉūúllēarkG|Pr‘VIEGTAGEĀṬNEṈ
The text reads paścād vā or after’. Jayaratha however comments on it as if it reads

paścāc ca’ ʻand after’. The edited text may well be corrupt, as the fifth syllable of this
line is long (guru), whereas the metre requires a short (laghu) syllable. This problem is
easily solved by imply altering the order of the words in this quarter to bhogāt pūrvaṁ
hi paścād vā. Although Jayaratha refers in general to the doubt that may arise before or

after spiritual practice, the Kaula context of the teachings concerning the Twelve Kālīs
cannot be ignored. Indeed, he may well have had it in mind, but did not wish to express
it directly. Kāḹī, so too the Trika goddesses, are worshipped by the offering of Kaula
substances (kuladravya). The main ones are wine, meat and sexual fluids. The offering

when made and received by the Deity, is returned to the worshipper for his (or her)

consumption as spiritual food that infuses spiritual energy into his consciousness. In
India, this practice, if it is not rejected outright or symbolically substituted, may well
occasion doubts in those engaged in it that they are handling impure substances and
hence are in danger of contracting it. This would be the case not only for orthodox
Vedic Brahmans, for whom a major part of their observance is centred on avoiding
impurity, it would also be so for dualist Śaivites, whose model of bondage is exactly one
of being sullied by Impurity (mala). This phase is marked by the withdrawal of the
means of knowledge, through which the true conscious nature of the Deity and the

offerings is rightly understood, and so doubts arise either before or after worship.
Abhinava takes this model to explain what is happening not in the course of the liturgy
(pūjākrama), but rather universally, in the dynamism of consciousness (saṁṅvitkrama) as

it unfolds, overcoming obstacles as it advances towards its original pristine state,
manifest in the twelfth phase.

TANTRĀLOKA

anyad āśyānitam api tadaiva drāvayed iyam |

prāyaścittādikarmabhyo brahmahatyādikarmavat || 157 ||
Although other things (apart from doubt may) have also condensed
(into thought constructs), they are dissolved away by that same
(consciousness) the very moment (tadaiva) (they arise), just as, for example,
(the great sin of) Brahminicide (is remedied) by the performance of the

appropriate rites of expiation (prāyaścitta).

The limited perceiver (by himself) cannot bring about (or remedy this

negative) quality called doubt, (whether it be an intrinsic quality) of his own
(conditioned consciousness) or (of his) mind. Thus, he says:

rodhanād drāvaṇād rūpam itthaṁ kalayate citiḥ |
Consciousness (citi) operates in this way by condensing (and
blocking) (rodhana) as well as by dissolving away (drāvaṇa) the form (rūpa)

(of thought constructs still unformed). (158ab)

In his commentary (vivaraṇa) on the Parātrīśikā (p. 247), Abhinava explains how

consciousness operates in these two ways, alluding to a didactic etymology (nirvacana)
of the name ‘Rudra’, to which he clearly alludes here also. The ‘ru’ of the name ‘Rudra’
denotes ‘rodhana’ — ‘condensing’ (i.e. external blockage) and ‘dru drāvaṇa —

‘dissolving away°. However, in his translation of the PTv Jayadeva Singh (p. 229-231)

translates rodhana as ‘inward dissolution’ and drāvaṇa as ‘state of external expansion’ʼ.
Experiencing these two aspects of the activity of consciousness, the Yogi attains the
vision (darśana) of the Deity of consciousness. Abhinava writes:

‘In other words, the one who has this vision (darśana) is he who, by virtue of

the infinitely (powerful and) glorious freedom (of consciousness), has attained the

(transcendental) being (sattā) of Akula, which is the cessation of all the waves (of the

activity of consciousness), and possesses (perfect mastery of) the power of the will. This
same will, directed at the object of desire contained within it, assumes the nature of the

power of knowledge, which is the subtle manifestation of duality (bheda) (as yet)

unclearly (manifest). That power of knowledge is the external condensation (and
‘fixation’, ‘blockage’) (rodhana) of all the organs of sense, which are the particular
vibrations (of consciousness). This is the process of continuous going (sātatyagamana)
(of perceptions into outer consciousness, which thereby differentiates them). (Their)

dissolving away (drāvaṇa) is (the act of) devouring (and consuming them into inner

undifferentiated consciousness). These two (opposite) activities of vomiting (i.e.
condensing within external reality) and devouring belong to the (same) vision, because
it is one with the universal perception (of consciousness) (sarvaprathā) and because

perception (prathā) is associated with this kind of wonderful diversity (vaicitrya). (Even

in ordinary life, one can observe) that an entity whose nature has been ascertained
beyond all doubt (asaṁdigdham) (can) serve (when its nature was doubtful) as the
support of both uncertain (alternatives,) such as a man and a tree. In this way, the

Supreme Lord’s power consists of what is the most difficult to do.”


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Although something may exist as a latent (potential) trace (sarṁskāra) in
this way, this supreme consciousness which generates (kalayantī) ‘the form
(rūpa)

(of the

thought constructs

that

are

still

unformed)’

in

the

aforementioned manner ‘by condensing and dissolving it away’ is called

Rudrakālī in the venerable Kramasadbhāva. This is the meaning. That is said

there:

‘All this (sarva) at the end of withdrawal is nothing at all (asarva),

perpetually setting (into consciousness), it is consumed inwardly by the line (of

energy) of the (powerful) look of (Kuṇḍalinī,) the Crooked One.' Then,

penetrated by the aesthetic delight (rasa) of (awakened) consciousness, She

pulsates (with bliss), undisturbed, as She emits countless rays (of Light) and
drinks them up vehemently. She within Whom that energy merges is said to be
Rudrakālī.”
Again, she is called Bhadrakālī in the venerable Pañcaśatika and
elsewhere. But although the names are different, there is none at all in the reality
(they denote). (The names) in both cases are in consonance with the reality (they

denote), as ‘dissolving away” (drāvayer) what has been ‘condensed’ (ruddha) or

‘divided upʼ (and separated) (bhinna). That is said there:

‘Present in (the reality) easily attained between the coming and going

(of the breath), She observes the Great Awakened Consciousness (mahābodha),

and free of the impurity of Māyā,” She delights in the nectar of knowledge.

She is auspicious (bhadrā), and benefiting all the world, She bestows auspicious

(bhadra) bliss. The energy that comes to rest there is known as Bhadrakālī.

The following passage from the Kramasadbhāva cannot be traced in the surviving

fragments of the text, nor indeed can any of the other passages that are said to be quoted
from there. From the following introductory remarks to this passage, it appears that the

Kramasadbhāva also contained an account of the Kālīs. Moreover, we notice that in this
passage the manner in which the nature of this Kālī is defined accords with the style of
presentation found also in the DP.

! The expression ‘kuṭilekṣana-’ literally means ‘sidelong glancesʼ, but here kuṭilekṣana
is Kuṇḍalinī — the Coiled One, who is also occasionally called Kuṭilā — the Crooked One
— in the Tantras. See above, note 4,453.

In the first case, we arrive at the name ‘udra’ from ‘condensed’ or ‘blocked’

(ruddha) and ‘dissolving away’ (drāvayet), and in the second ‘bhadra’ from ‘divided

upʼ (bhinna) and ‘dissolving away’ (drāvayeī).
The MSs of the DP read mahābala- great strength’ for māyāmala- ʻImpurity of

Read with the manuscripts of the DP bhadrā bhadrasukhapradā for rudrā
rudrasukhapradā.

Ṛead with the manuscripts of the DP, ‘bhadrakālī t’ for ‘rudrakālīī’. Noṭice that

bhadrā or bhadra replaces rudrā or rudra everywhere in these lines. As Jayaratha has

just noted that the name for this Kālī is also Bhadrā, it seems unlikely that Jayaratha
himself made these changes. One wonders whether this clearly intentional alteration is
the work of the editors or scribes of the manuscripts of the Tantrāloka and commentary.
If so, it was not uniformly done. Thus, MS Jh of the Tantrāloka reads bhadrakālīti for
rudrakālīti.

TANTRĀLOKA

As She dissolves away (dravaṇāt) duality (bheda), She is the auspicious one
(bhadrā) Who bestows the (most) auspicious (bhadra) accomplishment.

So too in the venerable Kramastotra:

bow to the auspicious one, the auspicious Bhadrakālī, Who devours
the universe with the radiant flame of Her endless power, that moves with the
terrible knitting of Her eyebrows at the end of phenomenal existence, that
resembles the repose (between phases of creation) of a great aeon

(mahākalpa).’

DP 5/37-38. The last line of the text is missing in the manuscripts that have been
recovered of the DP.


The Cidgaganacandrikā elaborates on this verse as follows:

arthapañcakam idaṁ tvayā jagad bhadram amba gamitaṁ tavāntaram || 236 ||

vāsanā sthitimayī bhavāspadā tvaṁ niyojya krṛtaviśvasaṁhṛtā |

tvadbhruvā kuṭilayā śive kṣaṇāt saṁhrṛtaḥ khalu bhavaḥ savāsanaḥ || 237 ||

kurvatī janani sr̥ṣicitratāṁ yā kalā bhramati vedyamaṇḍale |
brūhi sā tava kalonmukhī yadā tvaṁ kriyotkuṭilayātty amūṁ tadā || 238 I|

‘O Mother! This universe consisting of the five objects (of sense) (artha) has
been placed within (Your heart) by You (who are) the ever-flowing Fire of

Consciousness by the path of all the energized senses, and (thereby made) auspicious

(bhadra).
You (O Mother) are the latent trace which is stability once the universe has
been withdrawn, the location of phenomenal (fettered) existence, applied (there to the
fettered soul, it is thereby restrained). O Śivā, by Your eyebrows knitted (with a

wrathful gaze), phenomenal (fettered) existence is indeed withdrawn in a moment, along
with (every) trace (of it).

O Mother, the energy (kalā) that wanders in the sphere of objectivity generates

the wonderful diversity of emanation. Pray tell — if she is intent on Your energy (kalā),
You then eat (all) this with (Your eyebrows) knit with (the energy of) action.’

A kalpa, according to Monier-William’s Sanskrit Dictionary, is ‘a fabulous period of

time, a day of Brahmā or one thousand Yugas, a period of four thousand, three hundred
and twenty millions of years of mortals, measuring the duration of the world; a month of

Brahmā is supposed to contain thirty such Kalpas; according to the MBh twelve months

of Brahmā constitute his year, and one hundred such years his lifetime; fifty years of
Brahmā’s are supposed to have elapsed, and we are now in the Śvetavārāhakalpa of the
fifty-first; at the end of a kalpa the world is annihilated; hence a kalpa īs said to be equal
to a kalpānta (the end of a kalpa); with Buddhists the kalpas are not of equal duration.”

Swami Lakshmanjoo explains this verse (KNP p. 35) as follows: ‘The cycle of

withdrawal associated with the means of knowledge is like the state of withdrawal at the

end of a Great Aeon. The words ‘universe’ and ‘flame’ in this verse denote these two
activities of Bhadrakālī, namely, ‘dividing’ (bhedana) and dissolving away (dravaṇa),
respectively. Doubt born of latent residual traces also arises in the state of the
Inexplicable on the plane of the object of knowledge, but there is a vast difference
between the plane (bhūmi) which is the location of the doubt (śaṁkāspada) there, and

the one related to Bhadrakālī. The doubts that arise in that state of Yamakālī are
destroyed by the effort of the individual soul. If (in that state) the adept is not constantly

attentive to exercise the exertion which is his contemplation (anusadhāna), through


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Not only is this reality, which is blocked (ruddha) by being in a
condensed state, dissolved away, but also that which has been dissolved is
blocked (by being condensed). Thus, he says:

fī] gIāāa ādāvaTTĀRJ I| QÚ¢ I

tad api drāvayed eva tad apy āśyānayed atha || 158 II

(Consciousness operates by condensing and dissolving away the

form of the thought constructs still unformed,) as well as dissolving away
and condensing (those formed already). (158cd)

Although (the form of consciousness engaged) here in this way is the
means of knowledge, it is the perceiver who withdraws each particular entity
(into consciousness) that is predominant, which is why the author prefers the
word ‘rudra’ (rather than ‘bhadra’ as the name of this Kālī).
Once having described the nature of withdrawal in relation to the means
of knowledge, in order to describe the nature of the inexplicable (state of the
means of knowledge), he says:
8) Mārtanḍakālī — The Kālī of the Sun. The Inexplicable state
of the Means of Knowledge.

itthaṁ bhogye ‘pi saṁbhukte sati tatkaraṇāny api |
saṅṁharantĩ kalayate dvādaśaivāhamātmani || 159 ||
Once the object of enjoyment has also been enjoyed in this way,
(then) withdrawing the (sensorial) instruments of that (enjoyment) as well,
(consciousness) activates the twelve (senses) within the ego (ahamātman).
which they are destroyed, then, falling from his abiding state within his own nature
(svātmasthiti), he becomes extroverted (and does not look into his consciousness), just
as are other people subject to transmigration. However, the doubts that arise in this state

of Bhadrakālī are destroyed by themselves without the yogi making an effort (to do

that). Thuṣ, in order to stress this point, it is said that in this state of Bhadrakālī both
pulses of ‘division’ and ‘the melting away” of doubts arise together. From the point of

view of reality, the doubts a yogi has concerning what should and should not be done

continue to be obstacles until he reaches the plane of Sadāśiva (see below 12/20cd21ab).”

Swami Lakṣhmanjoo explains (KNP p. 36-37): “Although the sphere of the object of
knowledge was dissolved away completely in the seventh expansion of the goddess, and
the twelve senses on the plane of the means of knowledge that give life to the aggregate
of objectivity are withdrawn, even so, without penetrating into their true foundation,
which is the ego, their subtle being continues to exist. Thus, in this expansion the
Supreme Goddess, whose nature is the supreme subject, sets aside by Her own freedom,

TANTRĀLOKA

When the object (artha) has also been withdrawn in this way into
consciousness, ‘withdrawing’ the twelve senses that differentiate (and discern)
it (paricchedakārin), ‘activates (them) within the ego’, that is, merges (and
dissolves them away) just there. This is the meaning.
Now, what are these twelve senses? How is it that they are instruments

(of knowledge and action)?®’ With this doubt in mind, he says:

RRTNRGTTṬTAĀTTTTI
fṜĪT THT JTIĪ I Ṟē I
karmabuddhyakṣavargo hi buddhyanto dvādaśātmakaḥ |
prakāśakatvāt sūryātmā bhinne vastuni jṛmbhate || 160 ||
The senses of knowledge and action up to the intellect are twelve. As
this group illumines (the realm of the objects of the senses), it has a solar
nature. (Its sphere of operation) extends (jrrībhate) throughout the
different things (of the world) (bhinne vastuni).
(The group of twelve senses) ‘up to the intellect’, along with the mind

(manas), ‘has a solar nature’ because ‘it illumines’, that is, is the perception of
the object (arthālocana). Thus, in accord with the dictum that ‘the (wise) say

the plane of the limited subject and dissolves away these twelve senses, which are the
means (to perception) and are solar by nature. (She dissolves them away) into their
foundation, which is the plane of the ego, and so manifests her cosmic form in this, the
eighth expansion (which is that of the Inexplicable, in the sphere of the means of
knowledge).

The means of knowledge, as we said before, is the Sun, and so accordingly, as

the twelve suns in the form of the senses are withdrawn into the plane of the ego, this
(form of the Goddess of Consciousness) is called Mārtandakālī (i.e. the Kālī of the
(twelve) Suns), in the Kramastotra.

“ Ṭhe senses are of two types, inner and outer. The inner senses (antaḥkaraṇa) are 1)

the intellect (buddhi), that determines the nature of the objects perceived by the outer
senses. 2) The mind (mnanas), that coordinates and directs the input of the senses. 3) The

ego, that appropriates the sensations etc. perceived and discerned by the senses

as one’s

own. The outer senses are also of two kinds — those of knowledge and those of action.
The senses of knowledge (buddhīndriya) are the sense of smell (grāṇa — nose), taste
(rasanā — tongue), sight (cakṣus — eye), touch (wvak — skin) and hearing (śrotra — ear).
Those of action (karmendriya) are the hands, feet, speech, genitals and anus. The word
for senses is ‘karaṇa’, which literally means ‘instrument’, because they are indeed

instruments, by means of which the perceiver perceives inner mental objects and outer
physical ones, and the agent acts. The senses are thirteen. In this case the ego is not
counted amongst them, as it is where the other twelve merge. In other words, they are

realised to be aspects of it that emanate from it, like the twelve rays of the sun, to serve

as its instruments. In this context, ‘merger” into the ego denotes the recognition that it is
the individual perceiver who acts through and as the ego. Ultimately, this ego is

recognised, as Abhinava tells us further ahead, as the power of the Goddess of
Consciousness, who manifests as the Sun of the means of knowledge, that is, the senses.

Freed from thought constructs and objectivity related to the senses of the previous
phases, the means of knowledge is recognised to be that Inexplicable consciousness.”


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


that the Sun is the means of knowledge’, (the senses collectively) constitute

the means of knowledge. This is the meaning. It is said that the means of
knowledge discerns (and differentiates) the diverse (bhimna) object of
knowledge, and so it is said that ‘it extends (jrrbhate) throughout the different
things (of the world)ʼ.
Surely (one may ask,) the ego is equally a part of the inner (mental)
organ, so how is it that it is said (here) that there are just twelve senses? With
this doubt in mind, he says:

TagGaq āTTHTTTTGTTḤ |

#rad a- a. 1. 282 1
ahaṅkāras tu karaṇam abhimānaikasādhanam |
avicchinnaparāmarśī līyate tena tatra saḥ || 161 ||

The ego, however, is only the instrument of self-arrogation,“ and is
(the perceiver who is engaged) in uninterrupted (self) reflective awareness
(parāmarśin). Thus (the group of twelve senses) merges there (into it).

Again, the ego is ‘only the instrument of self-arrogation’ in the form

of “ḹ see, I hear”, and so, as uninterrupted (avicchinna) and not separate from

the perceiver, and because it does not assume a particular (form or quality,

regardless of the object of perception and the sense organ which perceives it), it
is the sense organ (karaṇa) that reflects on all things (equally). Thus, the group
of twelve kinds of senses merges there into the ego. The meaning is that it (all)

rests there alone.

Surely (one may ask,) even if there is no difference in their nature as
organs of sense, how does the group of senses, beginning with the intellect,
merge into the ego (and become a part of it)? He quells this doubt by presenting

(an appropriate) example.

#vīa faūfza: 1

yathā hi khaṅgapāśādeḥ karaṇasya vibhedinaḥ |
abhedini svahastādau layas tadvad ayaṁ vidhiḥ || 162 |I
This way of acting (vidhi) is as happens with (any) instrument, such
as a sword or a snare. (Although) it is separate from oneself, it merges, for

Above, 3/121c.

2 See below, 9/230.

The ego is always manifest in cognitions such as “T hear”, and “T see’. It is not

delimited by particulars, as it is equally present in the perception of anything. Moreover,

“I” is present in all subjects, and so is not relatively defined, but rather posits itself
absolutely as the basis of notions of relative distinction between things. The other senses
merge into the ego, in the sense that they are extensions of it.

TANTRĀLOKA

example, into one’s own hand, which is not separate (from the embodied
agent).
Here (in this case, one could ask whether) an organ of sense (itself)

possesses the capacity to impel (to action) (preryatva) as a separate
(independent entity,) or not. If it does not, then the undesirable consequence
would be that nothing (would have that capacity to impel to action). Again, if it
does have the capacity to impel to action, (an organ of sense) would be the
resultant action (karman) of the impelling activity (preraṇakriyā) and not the
instrument (of it). There is no activity (kriyā) without an instrument (to
implement it); thus, there (in that case) also, there should be another instrument
(to implement that, and s0) thus that would (result in) an infinite regress. Just as

an instrument, like a sword, for example, which is separate from the (body and
senses), serves as an instrument by thinking that it is at one (abhedabhāvanā)
with the hand, which is not separate from the agent. Similarly, (the senses,)
including the intellect and the rest, (serve as instruments of knowledge and
action) because they merge into the ego, ‘which is not separate’ from the
perceiver, because they are in contact with the subjective aspect (ahamaṁśa),
and so it is rightly said that the intellect merges into the ego.
He brings that (discussion) to rest in the main point (being discussed).

I| 2ē 1
tenendriyaughamārtaṇḍamaṇḍalaṁ kalayet svayam |
saṁviddevī svatantratvāt kalpite ‘haṁkṛtātmani || 163 ||
Thus, the Goddess of Consciousness (sarīviddevī) Who, because She
is free (in all respects), Herself operates (by Her own free will) the group of
senses that constitute the Circle of the Sun (mārtaṇḍamaṇḍala), within the
conceived (kalpita) ego (ahaṁkṛt).
‘Thus’, by means of the aforementioned process, ‘the Goddess of
Consciousness Herself operatesʼ, by virtue of Her freedom, not by the

See below, 9/230-232. There are a number of words for the ‘ego’ in Sanskrit. The

most common is ‘ahaṁkāra’ which literally means ‘I am the doer’. Another, which is
the one used here, is ‘ahaṁkṛt which may literally mean ‘done by me’, and is the most

common understood literal meaning. Another, which is the way a Kashmiri Śaivite

would understand it is ‘made by the ‘I’. In other words, the individual ego, which is an
inner organ of sense, is thus understood to be a product, conceived by the self-reflective

awareness of universal consciousness, which experiences itself as ‘I am’ in the

immanent sphere of manifestation. See below, 9/230-232. Gnoli understands that the

‘created’ ego corresponds to Mārtaṇḍakālī, and the uncreated ego, which is the Goddess

of Consciousness, to Paramārkakālī, the Kālī of the Supreme Sun. But this does not

seem to be the way Jayaratha understands it. The sequence according to him is as noted
in the headings, which are thus shifted forward by one with respect to Gnoli’s
presentation.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


intervention of the limited perceiver etc.,® the Circle of the Sun of the twelve

senses, beginning with the intellect, ‘within the ego conceived’ by (Her)
intense application (and attention to) the body and the rest. (In other words, She)

makes them one with that, so that She is said to be Mārtaṇḍakālī — The Kālī of

the Sun — in the venerable Kramastotra etc. Thatis said there:

’-T bow constantly to Mārtaṇḍakālī Who (consumes) to the end the

(aesthetic) essence (rasa) of all things, She Who generates the Sun (mārtaṇḍa)

that has drunk up Wheel of the Sun (pataṅgacakra) to serve, like a moth

(pataṅga), as fuel for the energy of (the Fire of) Time.”

T is the Goddess of Consciousness Herself that does this, not the limited subject.
Now that the thought constructs that accompany the operation of the senses have
been dissolved away, the Goddess of Consciousness Herself shines as the true perceiver
and agent that generates and operates the senses. This then is the inexplicable state of
the means of knowledge beyond thought.

The Cidgaganacandrikā elaborates on this verse as follows:


yo mrtāṇḍanibham arthapañcakaṁ prãṇinaḥ sphurati bhãmayo raviḥ |
£saṁhr̥tārdham anu antarāhitaṁ tad bahiḥ sṛjati cārthapañcakam || 241 II
+saṁṅhatordhvanikarasmṛtāvadhir vyyaktam aṇḍatanur amba bhāsvaram |
kālalakṣaṇakalāpradīptaye tvaṁ hi viśvarasabhakṣam āṣṭhitā l 242 |
Read saṁhṛtārtham for saṁhṛtārdham. Read saṁhṛto for saṁhato.
‘The group of five (gross elements that are the objects of sense) are (dead) like
a still-born foetus (mṛtāṇḍa). The Sun made of the Light (of consciousness) of the living

soul pulses (radiantly). After (outer) reality has been withdrawn and placed within, You
then (again) emanate that group of five externally.

O Mother, after the mass (of phenomena) has been withdrawn, up (to the latent
trace of) recollection, and the body of the Egg is manifest and luminous, You abide,

(engaged in) devouring the essence of all things (viśvarasa), so as to energize the energy
characterized (lakṣaṇa) as Time.”

Swami Lakshmanjoo explains this verse as follows (KNP p. 37-38): “The meaning is

that, although objectivity (bhogyavarga) is dissolved away in the aforementioned
manner, the Goddess of the Universe, whose nature is supreme consciousness, thus

establishes the Sun (mārtaṇḍa), which is the subject in the form of the (limited

individual) ego, in such a way that within this subject all the Wheel of the Sun
(pataṅga), that is, the twelve senses, are brought to an end, like a moth (pataṅga) that,

with great enthusiasm, abandons its life in a burning flame. In order to dissolve the

senses into the plane of the ego, the limited subject called Kālāgnirudra, who will be
described further ahead, should be energized. I always praise this goddess Mārtaṇḍakālī,
who dissolves away the aesthetic savour of the objects of sense into her own nature, that
is to say, I reflect on her essential nature, night and day.
When the yogi who is in the wheel (of the cycle) of the means of knowledge
enters the state of the Inexplicable, he experiences that, by illuminating Mārtaṇḍakālī,
all his senses in the wheel of the means of knowledge, along with their latent traces are,

once they have arisen, again dissolved away by the power of Mārtaṇḍakālī, and having

consumed them in this way, she (continues to) abide constantly. Some unknown teacher
has said concerning this state, as he praises it:

TANTRĀLOKA


So too, in the venerable Pañcaśatika:

‘Beyond the plane of the Sound Absolute (Śabdabrahman), present at

the end of the nine (syllables of Kālr’s Vidyā), at the summit of the thirty-six

(principles), beyond (Maāyā, which is) the part that is the Egg of Brahmā
(brahmāṇḍa), She is Mārtaṇḍī, Whose form is imperishable. The energy that

merges within Her is called Mārtaṇḍī Kālikā.’

Now that the group of four goddesses, who are skilled at consuming the

aspect (of consciousness) which is the means of knowledge, has been described

in this way, he now (goes on) to describe the group of four goddesses who are

skilled at relishing (carvaṇa)” the subjective aspect.

The Four Kālīs Who Consume the Sphere of Subjectivity

9) Paramārkakālī — The Kālī of the Supreme Sun. The emanation of the
subject.

RTTITTTATT
TiÑR JGTĀ TĒeT I /2E% I
sa eva paramādityaḥ pūrṇakalpas trayodaśaḥ |

karaṇatvāt prayāty eva kartari pralayaṁ sphuṭam || 164 ||
‘The supreme energy (of consciousness), perfectly pure, plays here (in the

Foremost Sacrifice) in its uniqueness. 1) Powerfully and all at once (rabhasat), (in the
beginning) it brings about the emergence of the wheel of the rays of the senses which, 2)
by the aesthetic delight (rasa) of supreme bliss, attains stability there (within it in the
middle). 3) Finally, here (too) it dissolves away by the destruction of limitation (bhara)
of supreme consciousness.’ (Quoted in comm. on TĀ 3/168ab (3/167))

The meaning is that when this state is reached, all the wheel of the twelve
senses arises with great enthusiasm and joy. After that, as a result of the intense internal

bliss attained there (in that state), this wheel finds rest in the radiant energy (tejas) of the

supreme goddess. Then, due to the unlimited light which is supreme knowledge (that
shines there), this wheel of the senses, along with their latent traces, also dissolves
away. In this state, the supreme energy (paramakalā), that is, Śiva’s energy (kalā),

which is the supreme subject, is seen to be playing alone by herself (ekākī).”
’ There are two forms of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī’ss Vidyā. One consists of seventeen syllables
and the other of nine. See the Appendix to Chapter Thirty concerning mantras.

' DP 5/41-42ab.

l Read ~carvaṇacaturaṁ for -carvaṇācaturaṅ.
” According to Gnoli, this and the following verses up to 167 refer to Kālāgnirudrakālī.
The text does indeed refer to Kālāgnirudra, but Jayaratha understands this to be a name
of the limited ‘created’ perceiver, which is indeed what the text says, not the Kālī by this

name.

The passage that begins here and ends with ‘he also explains the nature of persistence
(in relation to it) has been shifted from the end of the commentary on 4/165-167 that

refer to Kāḷāgnirudrakālī. The citations concern Paramārkakālī and so clearly belong
here.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


This (ego) is indeed the Supreme Sun, the thirteenth (sense organ),
which is as if full (and complete, as is the authentic, uncreated ego). It
clḷearly merges into the agent because it is (its) instrument.
When the twelve senses, beginning with the intellect, are withdrawn (in
this way) into the Supreme Sun, which is a name for this kind of ego, that same
thirteenth (sense organ) called the ego, which because it is intent on subjectivity
‘is as if full (and complete, as is the authentic, uncreated ego), ‘clearly

merges into the agent because it is (its) instrument’. The meaning is that it
atṭṭains a state of oneness with it. As (it) operates (kalanār) (there) in this way,

it is called Paramārkakālī in the venerable Kramastotra and elsewhere. That is
said there:

1 bow to that endless Paramārkakālī, (otherwise called) Bhargaśikhā

(the Sun Who is the Flame of Lord Śiva), within Whom the twelve suns (of the
senses) have risen and set, Who is like a flame (śikhā), the radiance (of which)

is extinguished in the peaceful abode (of pure consciousness).

So too in the venerable Pañcaśatika:


‘O Śiva, You Whose body is adorned with ashes, the single solitary

energy (without a partner) (ekavīrā), Who is extremely subtle and (beyond it), is

devoid of the subtle, She Who is the supreme state of the Supreme Self, Her

nature both supreme (transcendence) and lower (immanence), She Who is the

The Cidgaganacandrikā elaborates on this verse as follows:

unmiṣannimiṣadarkabimbayānantayāmba paramārthamadhyataḥ |

agnimūrtir iha sṛjyate tvayā bhakṣyate ‘pi ca sakṛtprabhātayā || 239 ||
bharganāmna iha bhāraveḥ śikhā śaktir amba viṣayendhanonmukhī |

śāntidhāmajuṣi yāti nirvṛtiṁ tvayy asau khalu śivaikapāvake l/240 l1

‘O Mother, in the midst of ultimate reality, You who, endless, are the solar orb

(arkabimba) that opens and closes, emit the icon of Fire here (in this world), and so too
devour it by Your shining forth (just) once.
O Mother, here (in this world), the power which is the flame (śikhā) of the Sun
of the Light (of consciousness) called Bharga (Śiva, the Sun) is intent on the fuel of the
objects of sense. It ceases (and attains contentment) within You, the Abode of Peace,

who alone purifies (and sanctifies) Śiva.’
Swami Lakshmaṇjoo explains (KNP p. 40-41): ‘The meaning is that, as the Supreme

Goddess, who is the goddess of the consciousness of the perceiver, is undisturbed by the
means and object of knowledge, she is completely tranquil. The twelve Suns in the form
of the senses that, rising and setting, dissolve away into their own essential nature,
assume its (natural state of) wonder (camatkāra). In the same way, the Supreme Sun
called the ego in the form of Bhargaśikhā, bringing its own radiant energy (tejas) to an
end in the supreme radiant energy (tejas) (of consciousness), enters into it. I praise the

goddess Paramārkakālī, who is the repository of this endless brilliance (dīpti). In other
words, dissolving away my own embodied etc. subjectivity, I penetrate into her own

essential nature.”

PRead

with

the

paramãtmapadãvasthã.

manuscripts

of

the

DP

paramātmāparāvasthā

(for

TANTRĀLOKA

energy that merges there with the supreme nature should be known to be

Now, having defined the nature of emanation in relation to the subject
in this way, he also explains the nature of persistence (in relation to it).
Surely (one may ask,) the agent is of two kinds, contracted and
uncontracted, so where (in which of the two) does that (ego) merge thus (and
dissolve away)? With this doubt in mind, he sa

10) Kālāgnirudrakālī — The Kālī of Rudra the Fire of Time.” The
persistence of the subject.

īā: 1| z, I

āraīTṁ a JḶ: || £.ē. I|
TTRGTTTGjftrraī ŪṬē-TG ṬTTĪGT: |

TTFGTTSIĀTTTTTTGĒTĠTT I E.9

kartā ca dvividhaḥ proktaḥ kalpitākalpitātmakaḥ |
kalpito dehabuddhyādīvyavacchedena carcitaḥ || 165 I|
kālāgniruḍrasa
a śāstreṣu paribhāṣitā |
kālo vyavacchit tadyukto vahnir bhoktā yataḥ smṛtaḥ l| 166 |I
saṁsārākḷrptikḷṛptibhyāṁ rodhanād drāvaṇāt prabhuḥ |
anivṛttapaśūbhāvas tatrāhaṁkṛt pralīyate || 167 |I
Again, the agent is said to be of two kinds, namely, created (kalpita)
and uncreated (akalpita). The created (agent) is covered over (carcita) by
the body, intellect and the rest. (The meaning of) his name — Kālāgnirudra

(the Rudra of the Fire of Time) — is explained in the scriptures. (He is called

this) because it is said that time sets limitations, while the Fire associated

with it is the enjoying subject (bhoktr). (He is called Rudra because) by

blocking

(condensing)

(rodhana)

and

dissolving

away

(drāvaṇa)

(phenomenal, conditioned forms), he assembles and dismantles the world of
transmigratory existence (saṁsāra), and so is the Lord (who, freely
assuming the nature of the individual soul,) has not rid (Himself) of the

` DP 5/39-40. Read with the manuscripts of the DP sā kālī for sā kalā.
According to Gnoli, this and the following verse describe Mahākālakālī, which is
indeed what the text appears to be saying. However, Jayaratha does not explain it in that
way, preferring instead to identify the Kālī here as Kālāgnirudrakālī, as he has

understood the reference to Kālāgnirudra in the previous verses as being just to the

limited perceiver, who is named this way there. Swami Lakshmanjoo, as we have seen,
agrees with Jayaratha.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


fettered state. It is there (in this agent) that the ego dissolves away.”

The ‘created (kalpita)’ perceiver possesses a body, intellect and the

rest that differentiate it (and separate it from the objective world). Why is (the
perceiver) called (Rudra of the Fire of Time) here when engaged (in daily life)?
With this question in mind, he says: ‘time’ and so on. (Time) ‘sets limitations’.

It is (itself) a limitation (vyavaccheda). The (worldly) enjoying subject,

subject to the limitation which is time, is Fire. He blocks to some degree
because no latent trace of (some) past enjoyment has awakened, (and so he
thinks,) “may that not happen to me”, and by (its) awakening, he dissolves
(limitation

away)

to

some

degree,

that

is,

he

makes

himself

one

Swami Lakshmanjoo explains (KNP p. 340): “After all the twelve solar senses have
completely dissolved away in the essential nature of the Supreme Sun, which is the
thirteenth (sense) called ego, it becomes totally intent on the state of the subject, and so

its form is fashioned along with the consciousness of the perceiver. In this connection,
the supreme goddess of consciousness manifests the goddess Paramārkakālī, in order to

dissolve away her consciousness as the limited perceiver, which is that of the Supreme
Sun (paramārka) called ego. In this expansion, the radiant state of the limited perceiver
previously described (whose other name is also Paramārkakālī) should not be mistaken
in this state for the state of the limited perceiver, which is common to all people on the

plane of transmigration, and is conditioned by the limiting adjunct of the objects of
sense. It is true that in this state, the fettered state (pasśubhāva) is also present as an
aspect (aṁśāṁśikārūpa); even so, this state (daśā) of the limited perceiver and that
(commonly) associated with the individual soul are extremely different. In the state of

the limited perceiver discussed here, the limiting adjunct of the senses and their objects
are not present at all, even as latent traces. Only the light of the perceiver, devoid of the
limiting adjuncts of the senses, shines (here) in a state free of thought constructs.

With this in mind, the teacher Abhinavagupta, referring to the consciousness of
the limited subject in this state (koṭi) as Kālāgnirudra, has described him (in this way in
these verses, in which) the Master says that the scriptures have called this perceiver

Kālāgnirudra. This is because he is associated with the conditioning division

(vyavaccheda) of time as ‘present’ or ‘past’, and is considered to be Fire, that is, the
worldly enjoyer (bhoktr). (Again,) he is considered to be Rudra, because he emanates
and withdraws the world of transmigration by ‘condensing’ (rodhana) and ‘dissolving’
it away (dravaṇa). As he is capable of doing all (this), he is the Lord. Even though (this
perceiver) is so much (advanced), the fettered state (paśubhāva) has not ceased (within
him) in all respects. It is within this subject-consciousness called Kālāgnirudra that the
Supreme Sun in the form of the ego dissolves away.”

have translated the word ‘kalpita’ as ‘created’, which is not wrong, but a more

literally accurate translation would be ‘conceived’, in the sense of ‘imaginedʼ. In other
words, the conditioned individual subject and its activity are, from one point of view, a
product of thought constructs. But they are not for that reason unreal, that is, just
mistaken notions, as the Buddhists maintain. The power of the imagination through
which it is created and acts is derived from the power of Lord Śiva’s freedom, and so is
a real creation derived from ignorance of its own true Śiva nature that Śiva Himself

freely takes on Himself to assume this form.
The word vyavaccheda, translated here, as is commonly done, as ‘limitation’,
literally means a ‘break’, ‘separation’ or ‘interruption’, it is a ‘cutting oneself off from’.

At the daily mundane level, this is what time does, it ‘separates and ‘cuts off’ one
moment from the next, interrupting the continuity of a timeless uninterrupted,
unconditioned present.

TANTRĀLOKA
(svātamasātkaroti)

with

(that

worldly)

enjoyment.

Thus,

(he

is

called)

‘Rudra’" Therefore, as he is intent on the object of (worldly) enjoyment, he is

‘the Lord (who, freely assuming the nature of the individual soul,) has not

rid (Himself) of the fettered state.’ The meaning is that he is associated with

the impurity of individuality (āṇavamala), which consists of the (continuous)
unfolding of craving (abhilāṣa). (The ego dissolves away) ‘there’ in the

contracted subject called Rudra of the Fire of Time, that is, in the limited subject

called Rudra of the Fire of Time of the Supreme Sun (paramārka), which is a

name for this kind of ego.

so ʻpi kalpitavṛtitvād viśvābhedaikaśālini |

vikāsini mahākāle līyate ʻham idaṁmaye || 168 II

The functions of this (subject) are created (kalpita) (and
conditioned), and so merge into the ‘Great Tīme’ (mahākāla), which,
(perpetually) expanding, is the sole abode of the oneness of all things
(viśvābheda), consisting of (the awareness that) “I am this (universe)”.


! For the etymology of the name Rudra as rodhana — ‘blocking’ and dravaṇa —

dissolving away, see above note 4,549.

Ṁ Concerning the nature of āṇavamala as the fundamental impurity of the individual
soul, which is its basic ignorance (akhyāti) of its true Śiva nature, as craving for worldly
experience (bhoga), see notes 1,352 and 1,1024.

The twelve senses first dissolve into the ego (ahaṁkāra), which is the thirteenth

sense, and then this dissolves into the limited, individual subject called Rudra of the Fire
of Time, who is Śiva operating on the level of the individual soul, where He generates

and withdraws the world fashioned for it to enjoy and suffer the consequences of its
Karma. This phase of consciousness corresponds to the emission of subjectivity, which
here in this initial phase is the limited subjectivity of the individual soul. This is the

ground and agent of the senses, including the ego, which are its instruments. When the

ego is withdrawn into this subjectivity, it is clearly experienced as grounded and

essentially identical with the unlimited subjectivity of immanent Śiva consciousness,
that has freely assumed a limited form. Note that in this phase, it is not thought so much
that is ‘condensed and ‘dissolved away’, as it was in the previous phase of Rudrakālī;
rather, it is the ego as the individual subjectivity which is the ‘enjoyer’ of worldly
experience. This arises due to its previous Karma, but more fundamentally because the

Lord has chosen to assume the condition of the limited perceiver due to operation of this
basic Impurity, namely, craving for worldly experience.
The next step is the recognition that however ‘contracted’, consciousness
remains pure, and is the essential nature of all things. Thus, the individual soul now

experiences that everything is essentially his own nature. This takes place when the next

Kālī dawns.
Swami Lakṣhmanjoo explains (KNP p. 41-42): “When the created (kalpita) perceiver
called Kālāgnirudra consumes the twelve Suns in the form of the senses, along with the

Supreme Sun called the ego, into his own radiant energy, the perceiver, by virtue of his
own (innate) freedom, begins to make his own limited condition (parimitatā) enter into


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

Once (this) ego has been consumed in this way, one should contemplate

the created (kalpita) (conditioned) subject who consumes it, called the Rudra of
the Fire of Time, also as a morsel (grāsena) (consumed by consciousness). He

too is a created subject (conceived by the activity of the mind), and because he

is created, he merges ‘into the ‘Great Time’, which is, as stated before, ‘Time,
which is Bhairava, emits the universe, beginning with (Śiva, its universal)

cause, up to (a tiny) insect.” (Moreover, it is the ‘Great Time’,) ‘which is the
(awareness that) ‘I am this (universe)’, and so because objectivity rests in
subjectivity, ‘it is the sole abode of the oneness of all things (viśvābheda)’,
and so ‘(perpetually) expanding’. (In other words, the created, conceived
subjectivity) rests in the supreme, uncreated subject, who is the reflective
awareness of full (and all-encompassing) ‘’ (consciousness) (pūrṇāhaṁ-

vimarśa). Thuṣ this (state of consciousness) is called Kālāgnirudrakālī in the
venerable Pañcaśatika and elsewhere, because it (arises) by the operation
(kalana) in this way of the Rudra of the Fire of Time, who is the limited subject.

As is said there:


‘The bestower of boons, her form all things, transcending the qualities

(of Nature), she is the supreme energy (kalā). ŚSoundless, she is Unstruck Sound

(asvarārāvā), engaged in consuming the Fire of Time.” Free of disease and
the unlimited condition, which is ‘I-nessʼ. In this connection, that created perceiver in

the form of Kālāgnirudra, associated (yukta) with the endless expansion made beautiful
solely with the diversity of all things (viśvabheda), having become the supreme

perceiver, dense with the reflective awareness of full ‘I-nessʼ, merges permanently into

Mahākālī. Thus, this state is considered to be the supreme place of worship of the
goddess Kālikā, who is the mother of the universe. It is also said (in the scriptures):
‘Time in the form of Bhairava emits the universe from (Brahmā, the first)

cause, up to a tiny louse, by the will of (the goddess). O mother of the world, You who
are she, are victorious.”
The meaning is that the power which is the supreme goddess of consciousness,
who by her unfettered freedom creates all the universe from Brahmā, the supreme lord

Bhairava, up to a tiny louse, is You, mother of the universe, whose nature it is to be
victorious (and excel over all). The sense is that when the yogi attains the location of the
radiant energy (of consciousness) (tejas), which is the supreme perceiver, he attains the

plane of the agency of the five cosmic functions. The sense is that just as Supreme Śiva

delights by his very nature when operating the five cosmic functions, in the same way,
the yogi who has attained that state is intent on bringing about the five cosmic functions.

One may ask way this name Kālāgnirudra has been given (to the goddess of

consciousness in this expansion)? The answer is that once having attained this state
(koṭi), the limited perceiver called Kālāgnirudra also merges into the consciousness of
the supreme perceiver.”

Kālikāstotra v. 6ab. See above, TĀv ad 3/234, where the whole verse is quoted. See

note there. This line is also quoted in TĀv ad 4/173ab.

Oṇe could also translate ‘full (all encompassing, immanent) self-reflective
awareness.’

Instead of -grasanodyatā engaged in consuming’ MSs Ñ and T read -grasanoditā —
‘arisen to consume’.

TANTRĀLOKA

formless, O (Lord) praised by the gods, She Who clearly comes to rest within

her should be known to be Kālāgnirudrakālī.’

So too in the venerable Kramastotra:


-Ḻ bow to Kālāgnirudrakālī, within Whom the Rudra of the Fire of

Time dissolves away, the fierce one Who is the aggregate (kalāpa) of (the
energies) of the inner fire that has embraced (and absorbed into itself) the Wheel

of the Sun, pervaded by the procession of time.

` DP 5/42cd-44ab.


The Cidgaganacandrikā elaborates on this verse as follows:


bhūtacakramadhukośasambhr̥taṁ tattadarthamadhu pātum utsukaḥ |

yan marīciviṣayaḥ sabhāskaras tvadrucau śalabhavat pralīyate || 243 |

prāṇa eṣa yamakāla ucyate madhyavāhatanur agnim amba yaḥ |
rudram etad upanīya khaṁ paraṁ tatra sargavimukhaṁ karoṣy amum || 244 |

‘Eager to drink the honey of each thing contained in the honeycomb of the

assembly of living beings (bhūtacakra) (and so absorb them), the field of the rays (of
the senses) along with the Sun dissolves away in Your radiance (ruci) like a moth (in a

flame).
This vital breath is said to be (the measure of) the time of death. O Mother, its
body the stream (of the breath) in the centre, drawing Fire who is Rudra close to the
Supreme Sky, You make it averse there to creation (sarga).
tvatkramopahatabhānumaṇḍalaḥ krodha eṣa layavahnir uddhataḥ |
viśvabhakṣaṇarasā marīcayo yasya bhīmavibhavās tvayāhṛtāḥ || 245 ||
grāhyam atra purato haranti te yat pṛthaggrahaṇam apy amuṁ tataḥ |

grāhakāṁś ca varade marīcayaḥ tās tvadarpitajagadvijrmbhaṇāḥ l| 246 ||
This Anger is the rising Fire of Dissolution, the solar orb covered over
(upahata) with Your Krama. Its rays (saturated) with the juice of the devouring of all
things, their glorious power (most) terrible, are withdrawn by You (into Yourself).
O bestower of boons, these rays are the expansions of the universe that has
been offered to You. Here, first of all, they steal away Your object of perception, and

also this (their) individual perception and then (its) perceivers.”
% Silburn translates: “The terrifying fire of destructive time has inflamed and devoured

the quiver of fiery arrows (agnikalāpa) within the form of the solar wheel by
surmounting temporal succession ~ she in whom it dissolves, I celebrate her as the

reabsorbing energy of temporal fire!”

Swami Lakshmanjoo explains (KNP p. 42): “The one called Kālāgnirudra,
whose consciousness is the created (kalpita) perceiver, has withdrawn into the fire of his
own nature the sphere of the means of knowledge consisting of the twelve Suns, which
is pervaded by time that conditions (the limited perceiver) and is pervaded by the five
cosmic functions of emanation and the rest. ḹ praise the goddess Kālāgnirudrakālī, that

is, I dissolve away the ‘I-ness present in all that is not the Self, namely, the body, vital

breath, and subtle body etc., into the supreme radiant energy. Kālāgnirudrakālī destroys
the perceiver called Kālāgnirudra, who possesses (that) supreme radiant energy. He
possesses the frightening mass of energy that arises by dissolving away the sphere of the

means of knowledge into himself. This is the goddess Kālī in the form of the limited
perceiver who has merged into the Supreme Kālī.”


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

Now, having defined in this way the nature of persistence in relation to

the subject, he explains the nature of withdrawal:

11) Mahākālakālī — The Kalī of the Great Time. The withdrawal of the
subject.

rf r̄āhcrzāTī āfṀTrzavũad 1 2

fxrrīfṝ dftāfīzēg at= Ġ#r u z'0 1
etasyāṁ svātmasaṁvittāv idaṁ sarvam ahaṁ vibhuḥ |
iti pravikasadrūpã saṁvittir avabhãsate || 169 ||
tato ʻntaḥ sthitasarvātmabhāvabhogoparāgiṇī|
paripūrṇāpi saṁvittir akule dhāmni līyate || 170 |I
(Then) within this, its own self-consciousness (svātmasaṁvitti), an

expanding form of consciousness (saṁvitti) manifests that “I, the AIlpervading Lord, am all this.” Then consciousness, coloured by the

enjoyment of the universal nature of everything (sarvātmabhāva) present
within (it), is completely full (and all-encompassing). Even so, it dissolves

away into the abode of (transcendent) Akuḻa.” (169-170)

! According to Gnoli, only verse 170 describes Mahābhairavaghoracaṇḍakāḹī, and he

reads verse 169 along with 168 as a description of Mahākālakālī. Jayaratha takes the
following lines from 171 to 173ab as referring to the last Kālī. Lilian Silburn follows
Jayaratha’s presentation of the sequence of these Kālīs, which may not be correct.

” See above, 3/66ab-66cd (3/66cd-67ab), conceming Akula, that is, transcendental
Siva, in relation to Kula, immanent Śakti.
Swami Lakshmanjoo explains (KNP p. 42): This is the expansion of the Supreme
Goddess Kālī (parākālī) within the Wheel of Withdrawal on the plane of the perceiver.
In the tenth expansion, the pervasive Supreme Goddess shines as everything in all things
(sarvasarvarūpatā), She is endowed with the wonder which is full ‘I-ness’ that shines

everywhere within the consciousness of one’s own nature, which is the supreme
perceiver. When the yogi enters this state, he himself (spontaneously) experiences the

condition (sthiti) which is Bhairava that consumes all things (alaṁgrāsa). In this state,
all phenomena (bhāvavarga) come to a rest (praśamana) without any residual trace.
Thuṣ, the result is that (the yogi) becomes capable of perceiving the consciousness of
his own nature, which is completely full in all respects. However, Mahākālī, who abides
on this plane of the supreme perceiver, craves to enter into the abode of Akula (i.e.

Bhairava), which is Her own essential nature, and so this Supreme Goddess gives rise to

this eleventh expansion. When the yogi attains this state, he transcends time, and as he
does so0, mounts onto the plane called Samanā (the Equal One) (see Appendix A to


CHAPTER ONE), AND SO BECOMES PERMANENTLY UNAFFECTED BY (THE PASSAGE OF) TIME
--------------------------------------------------

(akālakalita).

Having arrived onto this plane of Samanā (the Equal One), time abides in a

state of equality (sāmya). In other words, having arrived here, time, having completely
consumed its being, abides (as nought). The sense is that when the yogi attains this state,

TANTRĀLOKA

When the limited subject, in the form of the Rudra of the Fire of Time,

has been consumed in this way, one should contemplate the Great Time, that is,
the supreme subject, who is completely full (and all-encompassing) ‘I-ness’
(ahaṁbhāva), as a morsel (grāsena) (consumed by consciousness), that is, as
the repose within its own reflective awareness. Thus, within this (form of)

consciousness associated with the Great Time, the nature of which has (just)
been taught, ‘(a form of) consciousness (saṁvitti)’ ‘manifests’, which is a

particular experience skilled in relishing (carvaṇa) the limited subject (it
consumes), namely that ‘“I, the All-pervading Lord, am all this”, as is (the

experience expressed) in the declaration” all this glorious outpouring

(vibhava) is mine’, and which is the sole abode of the oneness with all things,

and so is (perpetually) expanding.” ‘Then’, after the manifestation (of
he experiences even endless time as just a moment. Abhinavagupta has said in his hymn
concerning this plane of Samanā (the Equal One):
‘“Where there is no notion of time (kāladhī) either as ‘always’, ‘then’ or not

even ‘just once’, that is the vision of You that is not eternal and that is also not said to
be otherwise.”

The sense of this verse is ‘O Lord, (in that state) no notions of time are formed
of the sort ‘always’, or ‘it will be at some particular time’, or ‘(this is taking) place at the

same time simultaneously (with some other event) (yugapadrūpa). There the vision of
Your nature takes place as it is in reality, of which one cannot say that it is either eteral
or not. (In other words, timelessness transcends the polarities of ‘etemal’ and its
opposite, as both involve some notions of time). It is because this state is free of the

passage of time (kālakalanā) that it is called Mahākālakālī (the Kālī of the Great Time)

in the Kramastotra.”
Ṟead -carvaṇacaturā for ~carvaṇācaturā.
Read ityādyuktivat for ityādyuktavat.

ĪP 4/12a. Also quoted in TĀv ad 1/41-42, 5/129cd-131ab (128cd-130ab) (the whole
verse), 7/64cd-65ab and 14/46. See note to the first instance.

. Eyery moment unconditioned consciousness expands to encompass, as it were, its

contents. On the contrary, the consciousness of the limited perceiver conditioned by its
situation in the body etc., ignorance and past Karma, contracts back in on itself every

moment with each perception. The oneness of subject and object in the one unitary
consciousness is an ongoing process of unification which is as if in a state of perpetual
expansion. The separation between subject and object at the individual level is, on the
contrary, a constantly recurring process of self-delimitation, that is, contraction of

consciousness, that is experienced only in the subject, extending momentarily in each
act of perception out to the object, to then withdraw from it, once known. This form of
knowledge is conceptual (savikalpa) and is based on relative distinctions
(bhedapradhāna). The object is ‘outside’ the limited perceiver and is not perceived
directly. The other form is the cognitive consciousness (sarvitti) which perceives the
object directly because it is ‘inside’ within it, at one with it. This form of consciousness

is that of the perceiver when freed of limitations by ‘consuming’ them into itself, that is,

experiencing that all things at rest within it, and so do not, and cannot, condition it. In

this case, the object is perceived through a process of unification with the subject that,

unmediated by the activity of the sense and mind etc., takes place all at once, not step by
step, as happens in extroverted perception. So, from this point of view, the former, is a

‘sequence-lessī process and hence non-temporal. The latter is on the contrary,

contaminated, as it were, by time. Kālī, the Goddess Who embodies process, time and


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


consciousness) in this way, the ‘imner’ ‘enjoyment’ of phenomena that abide
at
one with the perceiver, (each) the nature of all things, because every (single
thing) is everything (sarvasarvātmaka), is that of making them one with one’s
own nature by consuming them fully (in an instant) (alaṁgrāsayuktyā) by
the
process of violent digestion (haṭhapākakrameṇa). (Thus, this consciousness
is) ‘coloured” by that (enjoyment of all things). (In other words,) it is one with

(the perceiver, who) withdraws (them all into himself). Thuṣ it is ‘comple
tely
full (and all-encompassing)ʼ, and so (this cognitive) consciousness (vitti)
is, in

relation to each and every thing (karṁcid api prati) also, the agency of the act
of
perception (vidikriyā), because it assumes the condition of an object
of
enjoyment (bhogyatva) and ‘dissolves away, into the abode of (the

transcendent) Akula’, which possesses (the transcendental) nature

(in such passages) as (the following):

described

‘Kālī’s supreme abode, extensive (and abounding) with the glorious

power (vibhava) of the Light (of consciousness), immeasurable (ameya)
and
imperishable (transcendental) Akula, from which the waves of discrimination

between existence and non-existence have fallen away, is victorious.””

(Dissolving away there,) it comes to rest on the plane of the reflectiv
e
awareness of (universal) ‘I” (consciousness), which is the wonder (camatkā

of repose within its own nature. Thus, as (this consciousness) operates (kala1a)
the Great Time, it is called Mahākālakālī in the venerable Kramastotra etc. That
is said there:
-] praise Kālī Who, by Night in the cremation ground, where the great
elements (Earth and the rest) dissolve away, devours the Great Time, along
with
its opposite, is the power of time (kālaśakti). As such, She both binds by

subjecting

perception to temporality and frees it by withdrawing it, allowing for the vision of
all
things within the one divine consciousness of Śiva, the supreme perceiver, Who views
all things directly within and at one with Himself, sub specie aeternitatis.
See above, 3/262ab-263ab (261-262). There this process is described in the context

of the Divine Means (śāmbhavopaya), which operates in pure subjective consciou
sness
devoid of objectivity, and hence thought constructs. Thus, the Empower
ed Means
described here, which is concerned with the purification, that is, elimination, of thought

constructs, culminates in the Divine Means, of which the highest form is No Means
(anupāya).
Kālikāstotra by Jñānanetra verse 15.


The Cidgaganacandrikā elaborates on this verse as follows:


vaḥh śmaśāna iha bhūtaghasmare rajyate ‘mba karavīranāmani |
grāhakaṁ grasasi taṁ śrutaṁ mahākālaṃ apy asuhutāśadurgrahā l 247 1

dikcarī daśasu dikṣu yā bahistattadindriyamayãṣu jrmbhate |
antaramba karaṇatraye ca yā khecarī galasi te ca tatpriye || 248 ||

‘O Mother, the one who shines (as Your beloved) here in the cremation ground
called Karavīra that consumes (all) living beings is well known as Mahākāla
. He is the
perceiver that You, who are the fire (that consumes) the inauspicious (and
so) are hard
to grasp, devour.

TANTRĀLOKA

the host®' of the congregation (cakra) (of Yoginīs) who move in the Void of the
directions; She Who, inconceivable, shines like a fire (kindled by) the wind
(anilānalābhā).

So too in the venerable Pañcaśatika:

‘Burning with (the energy of) menses,® blazing greatly, Her light is

like millions of suns, free of the stain of the powers (of limitation) (kalā), She is
intent on operating (kalanā) Time. There, where She dissolves away, she is

called Kālakālī.’

Now, having described in this way the nature of withdrawal in relation
to the subject, he also describes the nature of the inexplicable (in relation to it).
12) Mahābhairavaghoracaṇḍakālī — The Horrific and Fierce Kālī of

the Great Bhairava. The inexplicable state of the subject.

eEe'E
ṬICAI

āTāI TĀI TŪĀĀT | .3 1
pramātṛyargo mānaughaḥ pramāś ca bahudhā sthitāḥ |
meyaugha iti yat sarvam atra cinmātram eva tat I| 171 II
iyatīṁ rūpavaicitrīm āśrayantyāḥ svasaṁvidaḥ |
svācchandyam anapekṣaṁ yat sā parā parameśvarī |I 172 |
The subjects, the (yarious) means of knowledge, the many forms of
knowledge (pramā) (they bring about), and the objects of knowledge — all
that, here is (pure) consciousness alone (cinmātra). The Supreme Goddess
Dikcarī unfolds externally in the ten directions made of each one of the senses,
and Khecarī inwardly within the three (internal) senses. O Mother, You devour these
two You love.”
Read with MS Jh -gaṇena for -graṇena.

Ṣwami Lakshmanṇjoo explains (KNP p. 44): ‘The Great Night is without the outer
light, which is the perception of duality (bhedaprathā). In it the five Great Elements
have completely dissolved away. In this state, the subjectivity of the body, breath, subtle
body and void have been completely withdrawn. The goddess Cinmaheśvarī (the Great
Goddess of Consciousness) shines in the cremation ground of the Heart, which is
completely full of inner Light. (She shines) where the senses of knowledge and action
are located, along with the Skyfaring Energies (Khecarīśaktis), who are (the Eight
Mothers) Brāhmī and the rest. She completely swallows up Mahākāla (the Great Time),
who is the supreme perceiver, and makes him one with herself. Thus, the goddess,
whose glory is beyond conception, who shines in this way, the equal of Wind and Fire,

is called Mahākālakālī, because she devours Mahākāla also. I bow to Her, that is, ḹ enter
into Her own inconceivable nature.”

Read with the MSs of the DP, ṛuyjvalā for ṛtojjvalā.
“ DP 5/44cd-45.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


(Parameśvarī) who is Parā (the Supreme) is the freedom and independence
of one’s own consciousness, which assumes this wonderful diversity of

forms. (171-172)

(All) ‘that’, namely, all this — the object, means of knowledge, subject
and (resultant) knowledge (pramā), that unfolds in many forms here, within the
Abode of Akula, which is the reflective awareness of ‘I’ (consciousness), ‘is
(pure) consciousness alone (cinmātra)’. The meaning is that it manifests as

one aesthetic relish (ekarasa). That therefore is the ‘independence’ (of one’s
own) self-luminous and supreme ‘consciousness, which assumes this

wonderful diversity of forms’, unconditioned (and undivided) by the subject
and the rest.
‘The reflective awareness (vimarśa) of that God beyond the gods, Who

is supreme (awakened) consciousness, is (His) supreme power, (that is, the

Goddess,) who is omniscient and the repository of (all) knowledge.”

Swami Lakṣshmanjoo explains (KNP p. 45-46): ‘Now the most elevated state of the

Wheel of the Inexplicable will be described, which is in the sphere of the perceiver in

the last expansion of the goddess Kālī, who is the wonder of consciousness. When the
previous state of the goddess Kālī, who is the supreme subject, enters into the abode of
the Inexplicable, she attains Her most clearly evident state, and so attains (her
completely) perfect state of fruition (pratiphalita), that is, Her own completely full
expansion. She is (completely) expanded (sphārībhūta) in this condition (daśā), and so
she, who is the wonder (camatkṛti) which is the supreme perceiver, gives rise to all the

previously described states. In order to make (all) that one with her own nature, her
place of rest (āśrayasthāna) is also formed. Moreover, having come here, the subject,

means and object of knowledge, as well as the goddess in the spheres of the wheels of
emanation etc., arise and recede. When all these states dawn, this goddess Parā, whose
nature is the supreme perceiver, is said to be in Her full (and complete) form
(pūrṇarūpā). And when, in the same way, these states are again made her own,
Maheśvarī is considered to be in her ‘lean’ (krṣa) form, that can bring about what is
most difficult [i.e generate them again]. This is because reaching this state (koti) of the

Wheel of the Inexplicable, all that remains is just the energy (kalā), Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. The

venerable Abhinavagupta describes the abode of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī in (verses
4/178cd-180ab
cof)
the
Tantrāloka.

This
goddess
is
called
Mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakālī, because she manifests (Her true nature) threaded

through with the Wheels associated with the subject, means and object of knowledge.

She dissolves them away into her own nature and also makes them manifest there. To
emphasize this point, the Kramastotra uses the adjectives ‘canḍa, ghora and

mahābhairava’ with great reverence with reference to the wheels of the object, means of
knowledge and the subject. She is called this because this supreme goddess Kālī in the
form of the Inexplicable (Anākhyā) swallows them up in the Great Devouring

“ This verse is also quoted in TĀv ad 5/77cd-78ab (77). There, as here, Jayaratha does

not tell us its source. Kṣemarāja quotes it in the ŚSūvi ad 3/27 (p. 113) and ibid. ad 3/44
(p. 139). In both instances, he says that it is drawn from the Kālikākrama. He also
quotes it in the NTu ad 1/22cd-31ab, where he attributes it to the Kālīkula. When he

quotes it in the SvTu ad 11/3cd-4ab, he says it is from the Kālikākula. There the fourth

quarter reads aviyukto yayā prabhuḥ — ‘from whom the Lord is never separatedʼ. cf TĀ
3/67ab (67cd): kaulikī sā parā śaktir aviyukto yayā prabhuḥ. ‘Kaulikī is the Supreme

TANTRĀLOKA

This is said to be the essential nature of ‘the freedomʼ

(of

consciousness), which consists of the reflective awareness of (pure)

consciousness, the nature of which is described in such passages. In terms of the
modality by which it is known, objectively (prameyaprakriyā) as the plane of
the subject, it is called ‘mahābhairava’; as that of the object, ‘caṇḍa’; as that of

the resultant knowledge (pramā), ‘ugra’; and as that of the means of
knowledge, ‘ghora’, and so taken all together, (She is) Mahābhairava-

caṇḍograghorakālī. According to our philosophy, She is ‘the Supreme
Goddessʼ (Parameśvarī) Who, as full (and all-encompassing), is called ‘Parā’
(the Supreme). As is said in the venerable Pañcaśatika:

‘O (Śiva) worshipped by (all) the gods, She Who resides in the emission

of the seventeen (energies), fierce like the Great Bhairava, withdraws all the

Power, from whom the Lord is never separated’. Here this quarter verse reads
sarvajñajñānaśālinī — (she who) is the repository of the knowledge of the omniscient
goddess) is omniscient and the repository of knowledge.’ This is also the reading in

MSs Ch, Jh and Ñ of the citation in TĀv ad 4/171-172, and is the one we find in
Kṣemarāja’s citations. Accordingly, I have chosen this one. Even so, ‘(the goddess who
is) the repository of the knowledge of the omniscient one’ is certainly the more elegant
variant and does not suffer from redundant repetition.


In SSūvi ad 3/27 (p. 113) Kṣemarāja comments on this verse saying:

iti śrīkālikākrama-nīrūpītanītyā mahāmantrātmakākṛtakāhaṁvimarśārīūḍhasya yad yad

ālāpādi tat tad asya svātmmadevatāvimarśānavaratāvartanātmā japo jāyate.

‘According to this teaching, imparted by the venerable Kālikākrama, whatever
one says who is firmly established in the reflective awareness of the uncreated ego
(aham), which is the Great Mantra, becomes the constant repetition of Mantra. (This
repetition) is the reflective awareness of the deity, which is his own Self.

In ŚSūvi ad 3/44 (p. 139) he explains: iti sśrīkālikākramoktanītyā yat
vimarśamayaṁ rūpaṁ tatsaṅyamāt antarnibhālanaprakarṣāt kim atra ucyate ayaṁ hi

sarvadaśāsu dedīpyamāno nirvyutthānaḥ paraḥ samādhiḥ |

‘According to this teaching, imparted by the venerable Kālikākrama, what is

said here (about this)? It is supreme (and permanent) contemplative absorption
(samādhī), from which there is no emergence, and that shines intensely in all states (and
levels of consciousness). (It is achieved) by the most excellent inner attention (to one’s

own consciousness that takes place) by concentration (sarṁīyama) on that form which
consists of reflective awareness.”

“ One could also translate ‘She Who resides in the emission of the seventeenth

(energy).” The Vidyā of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, who is the supreme form of Kālī of the

Kashmīiri Kālī Krama, consists of seventeen syllables. She is accordingly depicted as

being in the centre as the seventeenth and highest Goddess, surrounded by Her sixteen

aspects, represented as Kālīs, each of which embodies one of the syllables of the Vidyā.
These kinds of configuration (cakra, maṇḍala) of purely female forms are a feature of
the Kālī Krama. A striking, well-known example of the same, which is central to the

Śrīvidyā, is Śrīcakra, which also consists entirely of female forms. In both these cases,

the Goddess in the centre contains within Herself the male polarity, which must, of

course, be present in some way. The Wheel of Sixteen energies, in this case Kaālīs,
symbolizes the Moon with its sixteen digits. The seventeenth in the centre is understood


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Bhairavas and the universe. She within Whom She inwardly comes to rest is
Bhairavī, full (of all things). She is Parā (the Supreme Goddess), who is
Mahābhairava-caṇḍograghorakālī (the Fierce, Terrific and Ferocious Kālī of the

Great Bhairava).


So too in the venerable Kramastotra:

):] praise Mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakālī, She Who is beautiful with

the Moon (that shines) in the Void of Energy (kalākāśa), the essential being of

the Fourth state, which is the skilful power (cāturya) to set in motion the wheel

of the rays°" of the architect (vvāṣṭra) of the three processes (of emanation,
persistence and withdrawal).”
to be the emissive energy (visarga) that generates and withdraws the others. See above,
note 1,23 and 3/139ab-142ab (3/138-141) commentary and notes. The Vidyā of
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī is HRĪṀ MAHĀCAṈḌAYOGEŚVARĪ THR (M) DHṚ (MṀ) THR
(Ṁ) PHAṬ PHAṬ PHAT PHAṬ PHAT . Sanderson cogently suggests that if the first

syllable is, as it should be, the seed-syllable of the Goddess, then it should be

KHPHR̥ÉṀ not HṚĪṀ. Sanderson suggests that an anusvāra is required, as that is

common practice. See the Appendix concerning mantras.
“ DP 5/46cd-48ab. The last half of the last line reads in the MSs of the DP —ghorā kālī

parāparā. `(She is) Mahābhairavāṇḍograghorā
(transcendent) and inferior (immanent).”

Who

is

(both)

supreme

“” The Cidgaganacandrikā elaborates on this verse as follows:
tvaṣṭur amba śivabodhabhāsvataḥ sṛṣṭitaḥ prabhṛti yā marīcayaḥ |
dvādaśakramapadatrayordhvagās tāsu saṁcarasi vā trayodaśī ll 249 ||
‘O Mother, the rays of Tvasṣṭṛ (the creator Sun) beginning from emanation,
shining with Śiva consciousness, travel beyond the sequence of twelve (Kālīs) and the
three planes (of creation, persistence and destruction). You who are the thirteenth (Kālī)
move within them.”

l Compare the expression here — marīcicakrasaṁcāracāturya — with the expression

vaicitrya-caryācāracaturāḥ, with reference to the energies of the letters from A to KS,
that are ʻskilful in executing wonderfully various modes of behaviour (PTv p. 204).
Also (ibid. p. 282) taccakracāra-caturasthitayaḥ, with reference to the rays of the
goddesses of the Trika, whose ‘states are skilful in the movement of the wheel (of the
rays) of their (energies). Again, somasūryakalājālagrasana-vāmanacaturā, with
reference to the energies of consciousness that are ‘skilful in devouring and emitting the
network of the energies of the Moon and the Sun’ (ibid. 206). Finally, Sāmbapañcāsśikā
(3) —-srṣṭyādimarīcicakracitrasaṅcāracāturyāt ‘by virtue of the skill of the wonderfully
various motion of the wheel of the rays of emanation and the restʼ.

! Swami Lakshmanjoo explains (KNP p. 46-47): ‘The motion within the sphere

(maṇḍala) of the twelve rays associated with the Sun that shines as the three processes

of object, means and subject is the skilful capacity of (its) radiant pulse (sphurattā),
which is (its) cosmic expansion (viśvavikāsa). It is due to (this skilful capacity that) the

mistress of the wheel of consciousness, whose nature is the supreme perceiver, sustains

the nature of the essential being of the Fourth state, which is the Inexplicable. She also
shines in that Sky of Consciousness with the radiant light of the Moon in the sky, as She
is endowed in all respects with the light of the Energy of the New Moon (amākalā) (see
above, notes 1,16 and 3,432) which is (her nature as) Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. I praise that
goddess Mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakālī, who possesses all these characteristics, that

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask,) what is the nature of Her supremacy? With this
question in mind, he says:

J; |

imāḥ prāguktakalanās tadvījrmbhocyate yataḥ |
For it is said that (all) these operations (kalana) (of consciousness)

we have just described are (nothing but) her unfolding. (173ab)

Thus, as (the Twelve Kālīs) are the unfolding expansion of that

(consciousness which takes place) in such a way that the nature of every (single

one) is all (of them), all (the Kālīs) are also present in each (form of)
consciousness, and they (all) abide (at one with) consciousness and are not

different from it. Thus, because the twelve-fold nature is present in every single
one, it is said that in the rite of the succession of the transitions (of the sun into

the signs of the zodiac) (saṁcārakramapūjā), (the goddess of consciousness)

should be worshipped in one hundred and forty-four aspects. As scripture
(declares):

‘One should worship the goddess twelve times in association with (each

one of) the twelve spokes.’

Thus, there is not even the slightest opportunity to talk about a

thirteenth form, and so it is rightly said that in reality, consciousness consists of

just twelve (aspects, not thirteen). Surely (one may ask,) everywhere in the
Krama system (kramadarśana) (we find a) reference to the venerable goddess

Sukālī in the midst of the venerable goddesses of emanation and the rest, so

that there are thirteen goddesses in the Wheel of the Inexplicable. Thus, the
venerable Mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakālī is the thirteenth. That is said in the
venerable Pañcaśatika:

is, having dissolved away the plane of the perceiver (identified with) the body, vital
breath, subtle body and the Void, I enter into the essential nature of the unlimited

perceiver and of (the reality) which is full of the aesthetic savour of bliss.’

l Cf. above, 4/146cd.
l Emend svakālīm to sukālīm.
! Notice that this is the one place that Jayaratha does not quote the Kramastotra along

with the Devīpañcaśatika. Sukālī is the fifth Kālī in the Devīpañcaśatika. The

corresponding verse in the CGC is 231:

kālapālakamukhaṁ śivāntakaṁ viśvam abdhipatitodabinduvat |

pūrṇatāṁ vahati yatra dīpticidghasmarī tvam iha sādhyakāly asi
II
‘The universe beginning with the Guardian of Time (i.e. Kālāgnirudra) up to

Śivais like a drop of water fallen into the sea. It transports plenitude where You, the

consuming
fire of incandescent consciousness, are the Kaālī to be attained here.’


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


‘She is Unstruck Sound (ahalā)," frightening, fierce, (both) Kula

(Śakti) and Kaula (the union Śiva and Śakti), Sheis undisturbed. Undefinable,

She cannot be (perceived or) defined by (any) defining (feature) — Sheis (the
Kālī) called Sukālī, Who bestows success (siddhi).”


So too in the venerable Tantrarājabhaṭṭāraka:


‘And (1) Sṛṣṭikālī is the Supreme Goddess in (both) emanation and

withdrawal." Then' (comes) (2) the fierce Sthitikālī, then (3) Saṁhārakālikā,

(then comes) (4) Raktakālī who savours, without break, a stream of blood, (then
come) (5) Sukālī, (6) Yamakālī and (7) Mṛtyukālī Who arouses (great) fear, and
s0 too (8) Bhadrakālī, and another is (9) Parmādityakālikā, (10) Mārtaṇḍakālī

and (11) Kālāgnirudrakālī, who is very powerful. (12) the Kālī in the family

(kula)
of Mahākāla
(the
Great
Time)
(i.e.
Mahākālakālī),
and
(13) Mahābhairavakālikā (i.e. Mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakālī). (Thus) one
should know Kālī, Who is of thirteen kinds, according to (her) different

names.”!

The venerable Sārdhaśatika was quoted previously as being in

agreement with this view. Even though the intended point stated here is that
(this view is) common with that of the Krama teaching (kramanaya), how is it
that it is said, contrary to this, that the goddesses are twelve? It is said here (in
response), that here in the Krama view (kramadarśana), there are considered to

be thirteen goddesses, that should be worshipped in the Wheel of the
! Read with the MSs of the DP ahalā in the place of ḍakalā.

Read with the MSs of the DP kulakaula- for kulakāli-.

l Read lakṣanirlakṣā for lakṣyanirlakṣyā. The edited text of the DP, which 1 follow,
reads:

ahalā [k, kh: aṭṭalā (?)] bhīṣaṇā [k, kh: bheṣaṇā] raudrā kulakaulanirākulā |

alakṣyā [k, kh: alakṣā] lakṣanirlakṣā [g: nillakṣā] sukālī nāma siddhidā || DP 5/32.

“! This passage is drawn from the fourth ṣarka of the JY 4/4/38cd-42ab (MS K fl. 69b70a, MS Kh fl. 58b, MS G f1. 83a-83b). According to the MSs I have consulted, this line
reads: s

ālī ca [all MSs: ya] saṁṅhārī sṛṣṭā sā parameśvarī. ‘And Sṛṣṭikālī, Who has

been emitted and withdraws (all things), is the Supreme Goddess.”

! Read, with the MSs of the JY, tato for tathā.

“” Read with the MSs of the JY kālāgnirudrakālī mahollbaṇā for kālāgnirudrakālamahollbaṇā.

“ The MSs of the JY read rasśmibhedataḥ, i.e. ‘according to the division of the rays (of
the Wheel)ʼ. The JY introduces these Kālīs, declaring their association with the Kālī of
the Supreme Sun:
paramārkaprabhā śāntā sphuratsmaraṇadīpitā ||
bhārūpā paramā kālī kalayantī jagatsthitā | (4/4/42cd-43ab)
“Tranquil, She is the Light of the Supreme Sun, lit up with the radiant (power

of the) will. The supreme Kālī, whose form is Light, is present in the universe,
generating (all things).”
After listing the names of the Kālīs, the JY teaches that: trayodaśavibhedena

grasate sacarācaram | with (her) thīrteen divisions, She gobbles up the moving and
immobile (universe).” (4/4/45ab)

“2 See above, TĀv ad 4/149.

TANTRĀLOKA

Inexplicable in such a way that every one is of the nature of all of them. Thus,
to this extent, there is no fixed rule (niyama) (as to their number); accordingly,
in the venerable Kramasadbhāvabhaṭṭāraka, there are said to be seventeen

goddesses, that should be worshipped in the Wheel of the Inexplicable. As is
said there, beginning with:

‘O Mahādeva, arisen out of Time, She Who is bliss, rejoicing, Śivā,

dense with consciousness, (located) in the middle of the conjoined couple
(yugma) (of the two breaths), imperishable (akṣarā), Her field is the

imperishable.® Transcendent (akulā) and eternal (nityā), She is Kālakālī, Who,

undisturbed, operates (the processes of emanation). She within Whom that
energy merges is said to be Sṛṣṭikālī.”
(Ending with):
‘The wheel of the three processes (of emanation, persistence and
withdrawal), great and extremely fierce, is the architect (tvāṣṭra) (of all

things), rich with the rays (of energies), its nature (all destroying) time at

the end of the end of the aeon, acts there by its skill (in observing) the Great
Practice (mahācāra) (of the cycle of emanation and withdrawal governed by the
Kaālīs). She who is the energy (kalā) that is most fierce and terrible is auspicious

(śivā) in the fourth state (of the Inexplicable). (She is the energy of) the great
and terrible (ghora) Bhairava, whose form is fierce (caṇḍa), the great Kālī Who

consumes (all things) totally, the sixteenth, Who destroys time (and death).

Know that She is the seventeenth Kālī, Who does all things.”

Thus, one should not accept (the view that) it is with this intention that
the liturgy (pūjākrama) of the author of the venerable (Krama) Stotra (consists
of thirteen Kālīs). As they say:

““According to the venerable Kramasadbhāva etc., the petals

(patrikā) here (in the maṇḍala of the Kālīs) is in the series of (lunar) days° that

“ Here, once again, Jayaratha feels it necessary to justify why the scriptures say that
there are thirteen Kālīs, whereas Abhinava names only twelve. Here he says there are

indeed only twelve Kālīs, but according to the Krama system, in the supreme state of
consciousness, every single thing is experienced as all things. This state is a thirteenth

condition which contains all the twelve aspects in this form of oneness.
“’ But above (TĀv ad 4/126) Jayaratha affirmed that the Kramasadbhāva teaches that
there are sixteen Kālīs in Anākhyacakra.

“’ Read akṣarākṣaragocarā for akṣarā kṣaragocarā. If we accept the reading of the
printed edition, one would translate ‘imperishable, Her field is the perishable’.

“2 Cf. the first line of the verse of the Kramastotra describing this Kalī (above ad 4/171172).

2 Ṟead marīcyāḍhyaṁ for marīcyādya.

“ Noṭe the aiśa form saptādasī which here replaces the regular saptadasī.

“2’ A series of quotations of verses set in Āryā metre begin from here that appear to be

all from the same text, in which the Krama teachers and their lineages are described, and
Sanderson, for convenience, calls the Kramavaṁśāvali — A Krama Genealogy. The
author (here referred to in the honorific plural) was a contemporary of Jayaratha, who

quotes him mostly to point out what he considered to be his mistakes. Each of these
citations are marked with an asterisk, so that they may be easily identified.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


sustain the solar Kula (bhāskarakula), to which the venerable author of the

Stotra (belonged).

(According to this view,) there are considered to be thirteen or twelve

goddesses present as the objects of worship in the Wheel of the Inexplicable,

regarding which (we have) undertaken this discussion. In this way, here,

without the venerable Sukālī, there are said to be only twelve goddesses that

should be worshipped. What is wrong with that?° As (is said in the) scripture:

‘One should place the word, ‘mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakālī’

along with the words, ‘sṛṣṭī’, ‘sthitī’, ‘saṁhāra’, ‘rakta’ and ‘yama’, ‘mṛtyuʼ,
‘rudra’, ‘mārtaṇḍa’, ‘paramāditya’, ‘kālāgnirudra, and ‘mahākāla’ (all of
which are) conjoined at the end with the word ‘kālīʼ.
Including this (reference) in the (commentary on the Kramastotra
called) the Kramakeli, written by (Abhinavagupta,) the author (of the

Tantrāloka,) and thereby explained in this way, (it is clear) that nothing there
also should be understood to be otherwise (then taught here in the

Tantrāloka).

Read -parvāsu for —pūrvāṣu.
“’! Twelve Kāīṣs are related to the twelve months of the solar year. Several of them, as
we have seen. are overtly identified with the sun. The time they measure and consume is

that of the sun, which is generally identified with the thirtenth Kālī. Analogously,

according to the Kramasadbhāva, there are sixteen Kālīs, who are related to the sixteen
phases of the Moon in a lunar month, with the seventeenth as their source. This
reference is saying that the two series, one lunar, taught in the Kramasadbhāva, and the
other solar, taught in other Krama scriptures, are interrelated. In the CMSS, the Krama
teachings concerning the thirteen Kālīs are called the Bhānavīkrama, that is, the Liturgy
of the Goddess of the Sun. It is also called the Bhānavīkula, (see Appendix to this
chapter) which is virtually synonymous with the name Bhāskarakula. This is a name of

this Kula (lineage, tradition, school etc.) of the Kālīkula/Kālīkrama. The author of the

stotra, i.e. the Kramastotra, is Erakanātha. This reference makes it clear that the cycle of

(originally) thirteen Kaīs is elaborated specifically in this Krama lineage.
“ Jayaratha is again, as before, struggling to defend the view that Abhinavagupta has
been faithful to his Krama tradition, by maintaining that there are twelve Kālīs, not
thirteen. He did, in fact, omit Sukālī.
“ Read nyaset for nayet.

Jayaratha quotes this reference, found in Abhinava’s commentary on the

Kramastotra, the Kramakeli, to justify his assertion that Abhinava’s presentation of the

Kālīs in the cycle of the Inexplicable as twelve, not thirteen, is not of his own making.
Unfortunately, Jayaratha does not tell us the source from which these verses are drawn.

Itis a striking fact that even though this passage agrees with Abhinava, it does not agree
with any of the other sources we know. Sanderson (2007: 355) doubts that the passage

as it stands is genuine, and as he writes, is ‘earlier than Abhinavagupta, I suspect that it

has been modified to serve this purpose. The first line, giving the parts of the first six
names that proceed [sic (precede)] ~kālī reads yat sṛṣṭisthitisaṁhāraraktaiś ca
yamamr̥tyubhiḥ [. . .] but the conjunction ca is out of place and, more significantly, the
compound yamamṛtyubhiḥ has a plural ending rather than the dual it requires. The
anomalies arose, I suspect, by dropping -su- for Sukālī after yama- and then inserting
the redundant conjunction to restore the metre (< raktair yamasumr̥tyubhiḥ). If this is

TANTRĀLOKA

The Krama Lineages
Thus, here (according to the Kramakeli) (where we read that the
teachers are,) in due order, the venerable Govindarāja and Bhānuka etc., the
instruction of the teachers (of the Krama school) has in this way many branches.

Even today it shines intensely in a hundred ways on the path of the heart of
(those) great souls who are (its) great teachers. As is said there (in the

Kramakeli) by (Abhinavagupta):


This long citation from the Kramakeli continues up to ‘May I now also
grace (all) people . . .’

Kramakeli
‘Juṣṭ as the first (teacher) was the venerable and most excellent Kaula

adept (vīra), whose name is mentioned with reverence, called Govindarāja, the
second was the venerable one called Bhānuka,% and the third was the venerable

so, then the passage in actual fact attested to the thirteen Kālī model that includes
SŚukālī, as we find in all other cases.”

“ The following long passage beginning with ‘just as the first (teacher) . . .’ up to ‘. . .

present in my own being (to them) is a quotation from Abhinava’s commentary on the
Kramastotra, the Kramakeli. Ksemarāja confirms that this is so as he quotes a line from
it in his commentary on the Śivastotrāvali (ad 11/10), introducing it by saying ‘as has
been said by my teacher in the Kramakeli.’ (yathoktam asmadgurubhiḥ kramakelau)
(Sanderson 2006b: 36, 110). This line, as quoted below by Jayaratha, says:
śrīmatsadāśīvapade ‘pi mahograkālī bhīmotkaṭabhrukuṭir eṣyati bhaṅgabhūmiḥ “The
great and fierce (mahogra) Kālī, her eyebrows knit with tremendous fury, becomes the

plane of destruction (bhaṅgabhūmi) on the plane of the venerable Sadāśiva.’ Kṣemarāja
reads gatograkālī for mahograkālī. He concludes his citation saying: iti ato māṁ
kṣatamaraṇaṁ cidānandaghanam advayāṇīmādipātraṅṁ kuru. ʻMake me a fitting vessel
for the (realisation) of nonduality and the yogic powers of becoming small at will etc.
and, (my) death destroyed, (make me) dense (uninterrupted) consciousness and bliss.”

6 Bhānuka (the Sun), also called Vāmanabhānu, the sun-like Vāmana who causes the

lotuses of the lineage to blossom. Also called Vāmana, Vīravāmanaka (PS p. 146),
Vāmanavīra, Vīranātha is Hrasvanātha mentioned below. Two works by him have come
down to us. One is the Svabodhamañjarī (the Bouquet of (the Flowers) of One’s Own
(Awakened) Consciousness). The last verse declares that it is the work of Vāmanadatta,
the son of Harṣadatta, ‘a lion in the forest of Mīmāṁsā’. At the end of the other work,
the Dvayasampattivārtika (also called the Bodhavilāsa), the author adds that his father
Harṣadatta was born in Tākadeśa. I supply sufficient arguments to establish that
Hrasvanātha bore all these names, and take care to diṣṭinguish him from Vāmanadatta,
who wrote the Vaisṇava Saṁvitprakāśa, who tells us that his father was Devadatta, son
of Rātradatta (Dyczkowski 1990: 6-8; see also Sanderson 2006b: 38-42).
The Dvayasampattivārtika is a commentary (vārtika) on two (dvaya) verses
regarding the attainment (saṁpatti) of liberation-in-life by the fusion of the two aspects,
introverted and extroverted, of fundamental consciousness. Edited and translated into
Italian by Gnoli and translated into English by Torella (see bibliography), the
Svabodhamañjarī īs a very interesting short tract which, although not clearly

represented as a Krama work, declares itself to be the ‘oral tradition of the Śiddhasʼ, and

is compatible with its basic view that higher, expanded consciousness can be achieved

through attentive awareness of the experience of beauty, intense emotions and feelings

that arise at times, such as in the experience of orgasm (Sanderson ibid. 340). Vāmana


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


one called Eraka.” They obtained the same teaching from the venerable

Keyūravatī, Madanikā, and Kalyāṇikā, who (had all three) received the grace

(of the teaching) from the venerable Śivānandanātha, who had received the

teaching in the Northern Seat (uttarapīṭha) from the goddesses of (that)

sacred seat (pītheśvarī)."

was the teacher of Cakrabhānu and others, from whose disciples Abhinava learnt
Krama.

’ Erakanātha wrote the Kramastotra.
Later Krama teachers trace their lineage back to their first teacher Jāānanetra through

Keyūravatī alone. It is hard to say why Abhinava adds Madanikā, and Kalyāṇikā. He

does, however, indicate that Keyūravatī was the first. The other two were graced like
her with initiation. Female gurus are not very common. It is particularly striking
therefore that all the subsequent Krama tradition was channelled through Keyūravatī.

% Read uttarapīthe labádhopadeśāt for uttarapīthalabdhopadeśāt. The Northern Seat is
Uddḍiyāna (also spelt Oḍḍiyāna, U/Oḍyāna and U/Odḍayana). The Krama sources

normally portray it as the sacred seat (pītha) where male adepts (siddha, vīra) and
female (yoginīs) meet. There they are indistinguishable from deities and other
supernatural beings. Indeed, they too are such. The texts delight in describing the
revelries in the cremation ground there as awesome theophanies of the Goddess Kālī

and her fearsome retinue. One such account is found in the Kramasadbhāva. It begins:
‘In the North is the great sacred seat (pīha) called Oḍḍiyāna, the resort of Śiddhas and
Yoginīs. In that fair and excellent seat (pītha) is the Karavīra cremation ground . . .
thronged by great Bhairavas . . . In this most fearsome circle with great Mothers (mātṛ)

rests the supreme goddess Kālī in the limit of the state of self-awareness, standing on

Bhairava, devouring the power of Mahākāla (the Great Time of Death), void in form,
infinite, with eight embodiments, auspicious, adorned with fifty Rudras and attended by
the sixty-four (Yoginīs); Indra, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Īśvara, Sadāśiva and Mahādeva
Bhairava, the seventh, are ever present as the transcended ‘dead’ (that form the throne)

of that Goddess.' Here Bhairava himself seeks instruction from the goddess, asking
‘about the ultimate (attained) through the power of my self-awareness’. He wants to
know what ‘remains hidden in the heart of the Yoginī’ (edition and translation by
Sanderson 2006b 25-26). 1t is here, the tradition declares, that Jñānanetra (alias)

Sivānanda, who founded the Krama lineage that transmitted the Krama teachings
derived from these scriptures, received instruction from the Goddess Maṅgalā, a form of
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī Kālī, who is the leader of the circle of goddess of the sacred seat
(cakreśvarī). Sanderson (2007: 261ff.) has successfully identified the location of
Odḍḍiyāna as a small kingdom known to the Chinese as Wuzhagna (Japanese: Ujon) and

to the Tibetans as U rgyan or O rgyan (see also Dyczkowski 1987a: 3 ), located westnorth-west of Kashmir to the North of Peshawar, with its capital on the river Swāt.

Sanderson (ibid. 30-31) reports: ‘the goddess Maṅgalā and the Karavīra cremation

ground were indeed proper to it, these two facts being independently attested by the
Tibet U rgyan pa rin chen dpal (1230-1309) who visited Uḍḍiyāna (O rgyan) from Pu
raṅg in Western Tibet. He tells us in his ‘Guide to Udḍiyāna’ (O rgyan lam yig) that in

the heart of region, before the entrance to a town whose women declared that they were

yoginīs, was a sandal-wood statue of the goddess Maṅgalā (maṅgaladevī). He also
visited the cremation ground to the east of the town and records that it was called bhir
sma ṣha. Thīs is surely the deformation of vīraśmaśāna for karavīraśmaśāna,

confirming that the Kashmirian tradition is accurate in this regard too.’
Ītis possible, of course, that the plural here is an honorific and that the reference here
is thus to the one goddess of the Northern Seat. According to Śitikaṇṭha and others, this

is the goddess Maṅgalā (also called Makāradevī), who is considered to be a form of
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. She is thus the first teacher (ādiguru): srīmakāradevī ādigururūpā jīyāt

TANTRĀLOKA

Govindarāja > Somānanda
There (amongst them), the first (of these disciples, i.e. Govindarāja,)

who had obtained the teaching, (the thought) swayed (his) mind: “when so much
has been understood, what is there now (left) to do?’ With his mind well set in

this way, he (simply) waited for (his) body to come to an end, and as long as he
lived, all he did was simply to pass (his) time (experiencing) the enjoyment
(bhoga) (of the fruit of his practice that remained and) happened to come (to
him), intent on instructing well (those) disciples who were fit receptacles of this
knowledge, and (so) all this secret" was passed on to a teacher called the

venerable Somānanda.

Bhānuka > Ujjata and Udbhaṭa > Abhinavagupta
The second one (i.e. Bhānuka) also (behaved) in just the same way, and

his lineage includes a series of several teachers, beginning with the venerable
Ujjaṭa and Udbhaṭa onwards. I (Abhinavagupta) who have attained by (their)
grace glorious power, have explained this.
(MP (1 Śk) K p. 5) (May the venerable goddess Makārā, who is the first teacher, be
victorious). MP (2 Tri): vīrasiṅhāsanastheyaṁ devī (-vīī) paramamaṅgalā (-lām) |

7/85ab (This goddess, the supreme Maṅgalā, sits on the Hero’s Throne) and MP (3 AS):

ambaraughavikāṣaikadharmiṇīṁ [aṁvarāgha- -ṇī] maṅgalāṁ [-lā] śraye |
māyāto gālayaty āśu [-su] maṅgaleha tataḥ smṛtā | 76 ||

‘I take refuge in the (goddess) Maṅgalā whose sole nature is the (perpetual)
expansion of the flux of the Sky (of consciousness). She who quickly causes the falling

away (gālayati) from Māyā is thus called Maṅgalā here (in the tradition).”

However, one must admit that thisis not so in all Krama works. The early ones
refer to the goddesses of the seat as the teachers of Śivānanda. Thus we readin the
commentary on the Vātūlanāthaṣūtra (p. 18) that ‘the oral teaching (thatis beyond(2))
the six philosophical systems, the four Śākta traditions and the Union (of Siddha and

Yoginī) (melāpa) was put in sūtra form and revealedin oneness with the unsurpassed

goal by the goddesses of the sacred seat (pīṭheśvarī) at the time of the Great Assembly
to a certain perfected adept (sādhaka) by teaching him to experience directly the (truth
of the) thirteen instructions (imparted in the form of sātras).” Similarly, Ramyadeva
declares at the end of his Bhāvopahāravivaraṇa (p. 44) that he is one ‘in whom the joy

of endless vigour has arisen from his practice of empowerment revealed by the
venerable goddesses of the sacred seats (pītheśvarī)’ (translations (modified) by
Sanderson 2006 p 99 n. 343 and p. 82 n. 282, respectively).

! Read with MSs Ch, Jh, N, and T: sarvam idaṁ for sa cedaṁ.
Sanderson (2006b: 105 n. 368) opines that it is unlikely that this Somānanda should

be identified with the well-known author of the Śivadṛṣṭi, who was Utpaladeva’s

teacher, as the form in which he is mentioned would be more reverential. He notes that
in every other case the suffix -pādais added to the name as a sign of respect.

“ Read, as Sanderson (2006b:

105 n 368) suggests -ujjatodbhaṭādi- for —

ujjaṭtodbhaṭṭādi-.
By telling us here that he received initiation in the Krama teachings from this line of
teachers, Abhinavagupta implies that his explanation of the Kramastotra, recorded in

the Kramakeḷi, is inspired by them. Normally a direct commentary on a text does not


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Eraka, Govindarāja and Bhānuka
(The third teacher,) the venerable Eraka, exerted himself to achieve

success (in his spiritual discipline) until, having become thus® accomplished
(siddha), he thought: ‘“what use are worldly enjoyments (bhoga), that I have
experienced such great trouble (klesa) (to attain them)? How is it that I was not,
like (my) fellow students (Govindarāja and Bhānuka), intent (solely) as long as I
lived to just elevating those who approached (me for instruction)? For:
The great and fierce (mahogra) Kālī, her eyebrows knit with
tremendous fury, becomes the plane of destruction (bhaṅgabhūmi) on the plane
of the venerable Sadāśiva. Having understood this, one should, having
reached

the

supreme

state

(srhiti),

venerate

(adhitiṣṭhet)

the

goddess

Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī with the great force (haṭhataḥ) (that withdraws even Sadāśiva).

May I now also grace (all) people by propagating also by means of a
hymn the secret teaching present in my own being (to them).
(End of citation from Abhinava’s Kramakeli)

Jayaratha denies that Bhūtirāja was Abhinavagupta’s Krama teacher
Thus, those who nowadays do not know (Abhinavagupta’s) lineage of

teachers in this way (as stated in the Kramakeli, assert that):

“(There was) also a venerable teacher called Bhūtirāja, who was

another disciple of Cakrabhānu, and the teacher of the teacher of Abhinavagupta
in the Krama system (kālīnaya).

allow extensive rearrangement and omission of its verses. So it is possible that he

commented on the sequence as it was there originally. Jayaratha’s references to the

Kālīs being thirteen in the Kramastotra and offering reasons for that may suggest that
Abhinava made alterations here in his presentation in the Tantrāloka, not before. But

this seems unlikely, simply because the manner in which the Kālīs are deployed is an

integral part of how their nature is understood to be. We have seen (above note 4,397)

that a major reason given to explain this discrepancy is that the sequence of thirteen
Kālīs was the order in which they are worshipped, and that of the twelve Kālī is that in
which they arise as phases of cognitive consciousness. Thus, this is probably a
distinction Abhinava himself originally made, not Jayaratha.

Read with Ch, Jh, N, T: sann evar for san eva.
See above, note 4,401.
’ The hymn is the Kramastotra. The passage quoted from Abhinava’s commentary on

the Kramastotra, the Kramakeli, ends here.

Sanderson disagrees with Jayaratha here, agreeing with his opponent instead, that

Bhūtirāja was the direct disciple of Cakrabhānu. Apart from Abhinava’s Kramakeli and
the anonymous Kramavaṁśāvalī, we have two other accounts of the Krama lineages.
The firstis in the commentary by Śitikaṇṭha on the Mahānayaprakāśa, in OId Kashmiri.

The otheris by Amasiṁha. Śitikaṇṭha writes:

‘The venerable (goddess) Maṅgalā Herself was the receptacle of the descent (of

the teachings) in the location of the sacred seat . . . and she is the Accomplished Current

(siddhaugha) which is the fire-stick (that lights the spiritual fire) of the Kula of tripartite

TANTRĀLOKA

form which is the Current of Men (mānavaugha) (read mānavaughasya for
mānavaugha-), consisting of (Jñāna-) Netra, (Keyūravatī) the Queen (rājñī) and
Hrasvanātha. By ‘Kula’ is (meant) a particular lineage (ovallī). The firestick of that
(lineage) is the place where the (three teachers), which are like the three (Vedic) fires,

arīse.

And then, at the end of the Current of Men (mmānavaugha), comes the first and

foremost of the Current of Disciples (siṣyaugha), the venerable (Cakra-) Bhānu, who

was the lord of eight disciples amongst whom the Queen called Īśānā was given the

treasure of the tradition (5).
Juṣṭ as Mahādeva causes the eight (divine) forms to blossom, or Brahmā (with)
that number of Prajāpatis, or the dawn (with) the circle of the directions that are as
many, in the just same way, Bhānu, namely, the venerable Cakrabhānu, causes (his
eight) lotus-like disciples to blossom.
Such is the series of teachers (paramparā) of the traditions which, arisen (and

active), is seen (by all). It is the flawless path of the means (to realisation) which, like a
garland of lamps, is self-luminous and shines in the darkness (of ignorance).” MP (2 Sk)
p. 107-8, chapter 9, comm. on verses 5-7.

Arṇaṣiṁha had two Krama teachers from two separate lineages, which he

records in his Mahānayaprakāśa. The first teachers in both lineages are the same up to

Cakrabhānu, after whom they diverge. The first lineage begins with Iśānikā and
continues for three generations, through Nandaka, Sajjana, and Someśvara to Arṇasiṁha

himself as the fourth (MP (3 AS) 158-161). Residing in the ‘abode of emptinessʼ full of the

secret Krama, stainless and free from suffering, they are said to have attained the
knowledge of the Great Teaching (mahānaya), and thus received the Great Tradition
(mahākrama). Amṃasiṁha says about the previous teachers:
uḍḍīśapīthajā śriyā maṅgalānandanirbharā |

sadasadbhāsanāveśavarjitā tām ahaṁ śraye | 152 ||

tataḥ śrīmac chivānandanāthaguruvaraṁ sadā |
lokottaramahājñānacakṣuṣaṁ praṇamāmy aham || 153 II
śrīmatkeyūravatyākhyā
(-keryukhatyākhyā) pīṭhajajñānapāragā |

khacakracāriṇī yeyaṁ tām ahaṁ naumi bhaktitaḥ || 154 1|

mahāvīravaro yo ʻsau śrīmadvāmanasaṁjñakaḥ |

devīdhāmni sadārūḍhas taṁ vande kramabhāskaram || 155 ||

tataḥ śrīmaccakrabhānur devatānayadeśikaḥ |
mahāvratadharo yas taṁ vande haṁ paradhāmagam || 156 ||

akramakramasantānakovidā (-ṣantānākovidān) tāṁ namāmy aham || 157 ||
The first half of this line is corrupt in the sole manuscript that has been recovered.

There it reads udrīthapīṭhayā śrīman. The diction ‘śrīman-‘is incorrect. The feminine
śrīmatī (agreeing with Maṅgalā) would be correct, but does not fit the metre. Although
we do find such incorrectly irregular forms in the Tantric texts, one can presume that
learned authors would avoid them. Accordingly, I have tentatively emended to śriyā.
For udrīthapīṭhayā Sanderson (2001: p. 15 n 14) suggests: udgīta-pīṭhajā (‘born of the
hallowed seat’, with reference to Maṅgalā). I prefer to emend to udḍīśa-pīṭhajā.

‘I take refuge in (the goddess) Maṅgalā, who is the glory of the sacred seat of

Uddīśa, and who, full of bliss, is free of entry (āveśa) into the manifestation of the
(dualistic) relationship between existence and non-existence (sadasadbhāva). Then I bow at
all times to the best of teachers, the venerable Śivānandanātha, who possesses the eye of


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


great transcendental wisdom (mahājñāna). 1 reverence with devotion the venerable
Keyūravatī, who has grasped all the wisdom bom of the sacred seat and wanders in the

Wheel of Emptiness. I salute the venerable one called Vāmana, the best of great heroes

(mahāvīra), who, ever established in the abode of the goddess, is the sun (that illumines
the) Tradition (krama). After that I salute the venerable Cakrabhānu, teacher of the
Devatānaya (the Teaching of the Deity) who, practicing the Great (Kāpālika) Vow
(mahāvrata), has attained the supreme abode. I salute the venerable one called Īśānikā, she

who is adorned with the five insignia (of a Kāpālika) and knows well the tradition of the
processless process (akramakrama). (152-157)

mahānayaparajñānavibhūtisatpradaḥ (MS: -vibhūṣita-) sadā |
śrīmannandakanāmā yas taṁ namāmi khadhāmagam || 158 |I

śrīmatsajjananāmā taṁ (MS: naṁ) rahasyakramanirbharam (MS: rahasyaṁ-) ḷ
bhedābhedakalaṅkaṣya (ṂS: -kalaṅkastu) varjitaṁ praṇamāmy aham l| 159 |
nirmalasphaṭikaprakhyahdayaṁ vigatāmayam |

śrīmatsomeśvaraṁ vande mahāśāsanapāragam || 160 |
teneha krpayā mahyaṁ saṁpradatto mahākramaḥ |
yenāhaṁ navabhir vārṇakalaṅkair nāvṛto ‘niśam (MS: -vāṇaka-) || 161 ||

I salute the venerable one called Nandaka, who resides in the abode of emptiness

and always dispenses the truth of the wealth of the supreme knowledge of the Great
Teaching (mahānaya).

I bow to the venerable one called Sajjana who, devoid of the stain of both unity

and diversity, is full of the secret tradition (rahasyakrama).

I praise the venerable Someśvara, whose heart is as clear as stainless crystal and

who, free of the sickness (of saṁsāra), has mastered the Great Teaching.

By his grace here I was given the Great Tradition (mahākrama) by virtue of which

Iam never covered by new stains and obscuration.’

The second lineage begins with Prabodhanātha, a disciple of Cakrabhānu.
atraiva kathyate ʻsmābhir dvitīyā gurusantatiḥ |
pīthoditamahāmnāyarahasyakramanirbharā || 162 ||
śrīcakrabhānupādais tu paramārthārthapāragaiḥ |

kṛtaprasādo (MS: <de) vīrendrah (MS: vīrendra) śrīprabodhas (MS: -da) tapodhanaḥ ||

tenāhitaprasādas tu jaiyakākhyo mahāvratī|
jñānasaṁkrāntinirbhrāntaḥ svānandānandananditaḥ || 164 ||
‘Now I will relate the second line of teachers full of the secret teachings
(rahasyakrama) of the Great Tradition born from the sacred seat. The venerable ascetic and
Lord of Heroes, Prabodha (nātha), was graced (with the teachings) by the venerable

Cakrabhānu, who had grasped the supreme reality. Graced by the former, the one called
Jaiyaka, who observed the Great Vow (mahāvratin), was free of error by virtue of the
transmission of wisdom (he received), and was delighted by the joy of his own inherent

bliss. (162-164)

tenāpi ca śrīpaṅkakākhye dattaḥ (MS: datta) śrīkramaśāsanaḥ |

bhavatadabhrāntivibhrāntividhvaṁsoccaṇḍadīdhitiḥ (MS: bhavatūdbhrānti-) || 165 ||
tenāpi śrīnāganāmā deśikapravarāgraṇīḥ |
krtaprasādaparamāhlādodayavighūrṇitaḥ (MS: -prasādo-) || 166 ||
tenāpy ahaṁ mahāmnāyavaro ‘smin paramādbhute |

TANTRĀLOKA

abhiṣiktaḥ (MS: abhisiktaḥ) kriyāśrāntacittenāvṛttatejasā || 167 ||

itthaṁ proktā santatis tu dvitĩīyeṣā mahānaye |
nirāveśasamāveśacamatkāraughanirbharā (MS: -camatkārādya-) || 168 |I

‘He too gave to the venerable one called Paṅkaka the venerable Krama teachings,

the powerful rays of which shatter phenomenal existence and the delusion born of the
ignorance (it generates). He too (in his turn) graced (with the teachings) the venerable and

best of teachers called Nāga, who was thereby inebriated by the arising of the Great Bliss

(mahāhlāda). By him IĪ have been given the gift of the Great Tradition in this, the Supreme
Wonder, and consecrated by the mind, (its) activity calmed and enveloped with radiant
power (tejas). In this way this, the second lineage of the Great Teaching, overflowing with
the flood of the wonder of impenetrable (nirāveśa) mystical absorption (samāveśa), has
been declared. (165-168)

We are told that Cakrabhānu practiced the Great Vow of the Kāpālika, that is, he
carred a human skull in which he worshipped the deity. śānikā wore the ‘five insignia’ of
a Kāpālika. Arṇasiṁha does not tell us anything about her (Isānikā’s) fellow disciple

Prabodhanātha, but as his disciple, Jaiyaka, is said to have observed the Great Vow, he may

well have done so also. Paṅkaka, Nāga and Arṇasiṁha himself, who followed, received the
Great Teaching which ‘overflowing with the flood of the wonder of impenetrable
(nirāveśa) mystical absorption (samāveśa), possessed the liberating knowledge’ (168). But
they are not said to be Kāpālikas. As those who observe this vow are ascetics, either

lifelong, if their observance is such, or for the period of time they do so, it is possible that
the teachers who came later were not. They themselves being householders, the Krama
itself became more ‘domesticated’. Reading through the lines, this may be what Arṇasiṁha
is telling us when he writes:
itthaṁ parasparodbhūtaḥ sadgurukramavisṣṭaraḥ |

sthito ‘yaṁ divyasiddhākhyau (MS: -khyam) anujñātakrameṇa ca || 169 I

saṁvitpramāmahādbhūtasamullāsamahodayaḥ ḥ (MS: prāṇamahābhūta- -ya) |
abhyantaradr̥śā iti divyo ʻsau sadgurukramaḥ || 170 ||

‘The expanse of the lineage of true teachers has arisen in this way mutually (from

one to the other); it abides, called the Divine and that of the Accomplished (siddha), and as
the sequence (of men) who have been instructed. From the inner point of view, this divine

lineage of true teachers is the Great Arising, which is the outpouring of the great wonder of
the (pure) knowledge (pramā) of consciousness. (169-170)
Theṣe are the three currents we normally findin the later sources, for example

those of the Śrīvidyā traditio. The earlier Mahānayaprakāśa labels the three currents
differently, probably because the standard classification of three had not yet been

developed. Even so, both accounts agree in ascribing a special position to Cakrabhānu,

who is a pivotal figure in Arṇasimha’s account, as he is for Śitikaṇṭha, who declares that
the Current of Disciples began with him. Clearly, Jayaratha and the unknown author of

the Kramavaṁśāvalī also consider him in this light. If the latter is correct, as
Sanderson (2001: p. 15 n 14) maintains, despite what Jayaratha says, Abhinavagupta
himself received the Krama teachings through the lineage of another of Cakrabhānu’s
disciples, namely, Bhūtirāja.

Even though Cakrabhānu was considered to be a very important teacher, the only

work by him that has been recovered is the brief Pīthadvādaśikāstotra, the Hymn in

Twelve Verses to the Sacred Seat. But this does not mean much. These teachers were

generally not prolific writers, although what we do have is certainly of great quality. We


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Such statements, which are (just a product of) your own imagination, should
be ignored. The venerable Cakrabhānu has not instructed anybody in this

way. (This is clear) because (we) see another teaching°" nowadays, in a

hundred (varieties), as having that (other teaching of Cakrabhānu, namely, that
there are thirteen Kālīs,) as its root. Moreover, you people yourselves say that
the sequential order of the liturgy (pūjākrama) (according to) venerable


Bhūtirāja differs, (when you declare) there (in that same work) that:


(the teaching of the teachers) beginning with Bhūtirāja is based on the

intended sense (of the teaching of the) Devīpañcaśata’.

Now (an opponent objects), you maintain that just twelve goddesses are
the objects of worship here (in the Devīpancaśatika); then you are also ignorant

of the teaching (artha) of the venerable Pañcaśatika, and so go and ask your
own teacher. (To this objection, Jayaratha replies:) what use is our revelation (to
you if you don’t accept it)? As is the case with the Trika system (trikadarśana),
(Abhinavagupta) had teachers, (in the lineage) beginning with the venerable

Brahmin (bhaṭṭa) Somānanda, in the venerable Devīpañcaśatika also. The

should, therefore, take seriously the repeated claims they make that their main source is oral
tradition (mmukhāgama), and it is that which they transmit and to which, no doubt, they also
contributed.
Cakrabhānu appears in an interesting reference in Kalhaṇa’s history of
Kashmīr, the Rājataraṅginī— the River of Kings. There Kalhaṇa (RT 6/108-112) tells us

that king Yaśaskara (who ruled between 939 and 948 CE) punished a Brahmin ascetic
called Cakrabhānu for his behaviour, which ran contrary to established Brahminical
norms, by participating in a Krama ritual called cakramelaka. For this, the king branded

him on the forehead with the mark of dog’s paw. His maternal uncle, the yogi
Vīranātha, who was the king’s minister of war and peace, much angered by this,
performed a magical rite to chastise the king, who died seven days later. It is probable

that Vīranātha was Hrasvanātha, also called Bhānuka, who was the second of the three
disciples said to have been initiated by Keyūravatī and her fellow disciples. If this is

correct, we can surmise that Cakrabhānu lived around 900 to 975. Thus, it is quite possible

that Bhūtirāja, who was (whatever Jayaratha says) one of Abhinava’s Krama teachers, was

a direct disciple of Cakrabhānu. Śivānanda, who was three generations before him, lived
about from about 825 to 900. Thus, he would have been a contemporary of Vasugupta, to

whom the Śivasūtras were revealed, with which what is nowadays loosely called Kashmiri
Saiviṣm begins.

“ That is, that there are twelve Kālīs, not thirteen as taught in the DP.
Read anyasopadeśasya for asyopadeśasya.

“ The Devīpañcaśata īs the Pañcaśataka (also called Devīpañcaśataka. In the

colophons of the manuscripts, it is called Kālikulapañcaśataka). Jayaratha has quoted it
a number of times in his commentary on the previous verses, and so clearly considers it
to be authoritative. In actual fact, as an opponent goes on to object, the DP teaches that
the number of Kālīs is thirteen, not twelve as Jayaratha affirms.

“ Read tato gaccha for tad gaccha.
“ We know that Somānanda, Utpaladeva's teacher of nondualist Śaivism, was well
versed in Trika, as he wrote a commentary on the Parātrīśika. Abhinavagupta studied it
before he wrote his own commentary on it, in which he refers to it several times. Here, it

seems, Jayaratha declares that Somānanda was also a teacher of the Krama taught in

this, one of its most important Tantras. But he is confused here between that Somānanda

TANTRĀLOKA

venerable Bhūtirāja is not present there also (amongst them) as a teacher, (but

this does not mean) that he was not a teacher. As (Abhinavagupta) will say

(further ahead):

‘We will now talk about the Brahmavidyā, which instils insight

immediately and was taught to us by Śiva (in the form of) the venerable


Again:

‘Bhūtirāja, who was the venerable Śrīkaṇṭha (Himself) who, directly
visible, had assumed a human body, explained these three Vidyās (to me).”
However, it is certain that here (in this case, although he was

Abhinavagupta’s teacher,) he is not (said to be his Krama teacher).
Keyūravatī, Madanikā and Kalyāṇikā

Moreover, just as the venerable Keyūravatīdevī (kakāradevī) (was
graced with initiation) by the venerable founder (of our Krama school, that is,

and a homonymous Krama teacher mentioned above (see note 4,629). See Sanderson

2007: 382 n. 492.

“√ Concerning this Mantra, see below, 29/23cd ff.
Below, 30/62cd-63ab.

“ Below, 30/120cd-121ab. See also above, 1/9 and below 37/60. Jayaratha insists that

Abhinavagupta had no teacher in the Krama system called Bhūtirāja, even though this

quotation from the Kramāvaṁśālī declares otherwise. He believes that to be wrong,
because if Bhūtirāja did transmit the teaching of the DP to Abhinava, Abhinava would
have followed its view and maintained that there are thirteen Kaālīs, not twelve as he
does. According to Jayaratha, Cakrabhānu taught that there were twelve Kālīs, although
he did not teach this to his disciples directly. Even so, Abhinava somehow received this
teaching and followed it in his commentary on the Kramastotra, the Kramakeli.
However, there is no scriptural tradition prior to Abhinava that maintains this. Only the

Kramasadbhāva says that the Kālīs in the cycle of the Inexplicable are not thirteen.
However, there they are seventeen, not twelve, Kāḹīs. It is most likely that Abhinava

himself reduced the number of Kālīs to twelve, and made changes to their sequential
order. Jayaratha is averse to believing this. Innovation is generally suspect in India, even
if the innovator is of the calibre of Abhinavagupta. One may ask why Jayaratha is able
to accept that Cakrabhānu made these changes. The answer to this question may be that

he was a mainstream teacher in the Krama tradition of exceptional importance who
represented a cardinal point of departure in its development. Sanderson has presented

strong positive evidence that Bhūtirāja

was indeed one of Abhinava’s teachers of

Krama. Although it is possible that a different person called Bhūtirāja taught Abhinava
these things, this does not vitiate the preceding argument (see above note, comm. 1/9).
See also Sanderson 2007: 361-362 for more arguments and citations from Bhūtirāja

which are of an evidently Krama nature, confirming that he was indeed a Krama
teacher. Concerning the number of Kālīs, see above notes 4,482 and 623.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Śivānanda, alias Jñānanetra), similarly the venerable Madanikā and Kalyāṇikā

were also graced (by him), and so this too has been determined (to be correct).
(It is said) that:

‘the Lord (nātha) (Jñānanetra), teaching unity in the difference
(bhedābheda), based on the four phases (kula) of the Krama, made in this way

just seventeen disciples, (some of) whom had disciples (savaṁśa) (of their own,
whereas) others did not.”

(However,) this fixed (figure) is not a reasonable one, because these two
disciples have not been enumerated (along with them), and also because there

may well have been another also. In this way, one should also know that:

“beginning from the venerable Keyūravatī up to the venerable disciple
Cakrabhānu, there are perceived in this way to be sixteen members here in the

lineage of the Krama (atinaya).

Moreover, it is not right to say that the venerable goddess Kakāra (i.
Keyūravatī) had just the three disciples (as is declared in the following
statement):

"Three disciples are known belonging to the Krama school, transmitted
in the vernacular (prakṛtamahānaya), who had disciples (savaṁśa).”
Naverakanātha
Rather, (she had three more,) because the venerable Govindarāja and

Bhānuka were (her) disciples (as stated above by Abhinavagupta), and


Naverakanātha was also her disciple. As they say:


“’ The founder of such schools is normally referred to as its ‘avatāraka’, lit. the one
who brought it down (to earth). Matsyendranātha, who is credited with founding
Kauḻism, is referred to in the same way (above comm. 1/7).

We have just seen that Keyūravatī was the direct disciple of Jñānanetra, the founder

of this Krama lineage, and that Cakrabhānu is the second generation after her, so it
would not be right to understand from this third statement that there are a series of

sixteen generations of disciples between her and Cakrabhānu. Moreover, conversely, it

would be wrong to understand that Cakrabhānu and Keyūravatī were both, amongst

others, direct disciples of Jñānanetra.

Kramadarśana, Kramaśāṣana, Kramārtha, Kramanaya, Mahārtha, Mahānaya,

Mahāmnāya, Mahāśāsana, Kālīnaya, Kālikākrama, Kālīkrama Devatānaya, Devīnaya,

Atinaya and Rahasyāmnāya (Sanderson 2006: 15, n. 37) are the most common names

for the fully formed Krama system that developed out of the Kālīkula (also called
Kālīkrama).

“ 1t seems that a distinction is made here between the Krama tradition transmitted in

the vernacular — prakṛta — and that transmitted through Sanskrit. Several examples of

the former have survived, like Śitikaṇṭha’s Mahānayaprakāśa, which is written in early
Kashmūri, as is the Chommasaṁpradāya. The root verses of the Mahārthamañjari are in
a vemnacular of Mahārāṣṭra. AII of them have Sanskrit commentaries and translations,
some by the authors themselves.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘I bow to you, the venerable (devī) Keyūravatī, who, famous (in all the

world), resides in the Signless (Absolute) (aniketa).' (You are) she who is said

to shine without break as the nature of all things by the abundance® (of the
inner) vision of the Skyfaring (energy of consciousness).”
‘I praise the one called the venerable Navera, whose glory (vibhava) has

destroyed all (fettered states of) existence; that (glory which is) the elevation (of

consciousness) that comes from (his) touch (sparśodaya), unfolds (within his
disciples) pouring out playfully with the fall of the stream of the rays (of divine
consciousness).”

Hrasvanātha (also called Vīranātha)
Similarly, the venerable Hrasvanātha® also did not have just five
disciples (even though it is said that): “the venerable Vīranātha made five
disciples in the Krama (devīnaya), because there is a sixth (disciple), who is the

venerable Bhojarāja by name.
That is said by the venerable Somarāja in the course of his account of

his own lineage:

“The venerable sun-like Vāmana (vāmanabhānu) is skilful in unfolding

the lotuses of the tradition (and energies of the processes of consciousness)

(krama); he who has fashioned (his) lineage in the Supreme Sky beyond the

cosmic order (sadadhvan), triumphs.’

““ The highest state is called ‘Aniketa’. This means both ‘without sign’, that is, any

phenomenally distinguishable mark, and ‘without abode’, in the sense that it is not a
physical place.

“ Read ~drṣṭeroghāt for -dṛsṣṭiroghāt.

“6 See Ernst concerning ‘touch’.

See above, note 4,636.
“ Jayaratha has presented genealogies from at least three, if not four sources. These are
1) the Kramakeli by Abhinava with which he agrees; 2) the anonymous
‘Kramavaṁśāvali he criticizes; 3) one written by Somarāja; and 4) the source from

which are drawn the two verses beginning with ‘I bow to you, the venerable (devī)

Keyūravatī . . ... Jayaratha tells us of the existence of many Krama schools that present
various genealogies he considers to be incorrect. He quotes from the Trivandrum MP
(TĀv ad 4/125) (which does not contain one). But he does not seem to know the
Mahānayaprakāśa written by Arṇasiṁha and the one in Kashmiri commented by

ŚSitikaṇtha, that do contain genealogies. Was this because they had not yet been written?
A reference he draws from the text he criticises refers to ‘the Krama school transmitted
in the veracular’ (prakṛtamahānaya). This would include the MP. by Śitikaṇṭha, if it

existed at the time.

““Here ‘kramakamala’ can mean both ‘the lotuses of the lineage’ and lotuses of the

spheres of energies of the flow (krama) of the energy of consciousness that expand and
blossom into their full potential, thereby illumining consciousness. Arṇasiṁha also

refers to Vāmana just after Keyūravatī in his account of the lineage of Krama teachers.

He also extolls his sun-like quality with the words: ‘ praise the best amongst the great
Heroes, the venerable Vāmana by name, that sun of (the lotuses of) the Krama (lineage),
who is perpetually established in the abode (and radiant power) (dhāman) of the
goddess (MP (3 AS) v. 156).


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Bhojarāja

‘I praise Bhojarāja, who along with the most excellent of teachers,®° is

the sagesʼ (arhat) inner object of worship; he who has destroyed all the darkness

of the most deep, great and terrible delusion; he who has rightly given the light
which is the (ultimate) repose of the exuberance of the most excellent° lotuslike (disciples) of the lineage (krama); who has attained the plane of union
with the incomparable aesthetic relish (sarasāsvāda) of consciousness.”
The many kinds of incorrect (views) that there are and are possible,

have not been explained here in this (detailed) manner, because they are not
relevant.

Twelve Kālīs, not Thirteen Kālīs
(But) surely (one may object), how can this (view) be made consistent

in this way with (the teachings) of the lineage of teachers (gurukrama)? Here

(according to you), these goddesses are just twelve, whereas (Jñānanetra,) the
venerable founder (avatārakanātha) (of the Krama tradition), who is the grand-

teacher of the venerable Govindarāja etc., implies that they are thirteen. As is he
(himself) has said (in the Kālikāstotra):

‘The nature of Your own nature (ṣvarūparūpa) is one; divided into

extension (prasara), persistence and merger, it is of three kinds. Again, each
one (of these) is of four kinds, as (its) arising, persistence, merger and repose.
Having thus ordained that Your own innate (sahaja) nature is the thirteenth,

(this) Your form (rāpa) that impels the continuous round of the apparent change

of all things, triumphs.”

(We reply that) this is true. Who disagrees here (with this)? However,

we say that he also intends (to say) that there are (just) twelve (Kālīs). The
teaching that the venerable Govindarāja and the rest (began) propagating in this
regard has reached us also. As (Jñānanetra) has said:

‘O Kālī, having divided up the body’' of Time into twelve, (generating)

that (which is your own) nature, making it shine radiantly within Yourself (as

one), You triumph!

Read along with MSs ch, jh and ñ̃: -sahitaṁ for -mahitaṁ.

Read -kamalavara- for -kamalavana-.
“ Read -bhumiḥ for bhogā.
“Kālikāstotra verses 8-9. Instead of viśvavivartāvartapravartakaṁ — ‘(Your form

(rūpa) that) impels the continuous round of the apparent change of all things’. MS reads
viśvavivartāvivartavartakaṁ- (Your form (rūpa) that) abides in the apparent change

and its absence of all things.”

Iṇṣṭead of dehaṁ — body’ MS N, T read rūparṁ — formʼ or ‘nature’
“N Kālikāstotra verse 5. Sanderson (2007: 354) explains that Jayaratha claims that ‘the

tradition of twelve was that received by the three disciples Govindarāja, Bhānuka, and

Eraka. To the objection that Jñānanetra himself taught that there were thirteen in his

TANTRĀḺLOKA

The meaning here is as follows. O Kālī! O goddess You Whose nature
is such as described! The form of time which divides up its own nature, whose
sole nature is the supreme light (of consciousness), is, according to (the

following) dictum, the cause of the progressive differentiation of all things

(viśvakalanā): ʻTīme, which is Bhairava, emits the universe, beginning with

(Śiva, its universal) cause, up to (a tiny) insect.”

Having thus, in the aforementioned way, divided up its form into twelve
and poured it out externally in this way, and then again (generating) that form
(of time) which is (apparently) separate (and independent), (You) make it shine
radiantly within Yourself, Whose form is the one compact (uninterrupted) light
(of consciousness). Making it manifest like a reflection in a mirror, as not
separate (from Your own conscious nature), You are victorious, that is, You

shine radiantly at all times in the form of the Inexplicable, that can do what is

most difficult to do (atidurghaṭakāriṇn)."

(The opponent rejoins that,) surely in this way, that (view) is
contradicted by what was (said before in the verse beginning with) ‘the nature
of Your own nature (svarūparūpa) is one. How can one, having explained
that supreme consciousness arises twelve-fold, also say that it is thirteen-fold?
Should one not say that the Goddess Who abides as the agency (of these
processes) is the thirteenth, so that these two (statements) may agree? (We say
that that) is not so. Even if one wishes to say that, the contingency would arise
that in further (reasoned) statements (concerning this matter, one would have to
accept that) there is a fourteenth form, as here (in this case) also, the Goddess
abides in the same way as the agent (of the thirteenth state). (We say that) in

actual fact, in both cases this is the miserable state (daurātmya) of thought
Kālikāstotra and that therefore this tradition can only be an unwarranted deviation in a

branch of his spiritual descendants, Jayaratha replies that in fact Jñānanetra taught both
twelve and thirteen in that work, so that both traditions are valid options. That argument
is empty, since the verse on the twelve states that the Goddess manifests twelve
divisions while remaining grounded in her own nature, which is evidently the
thirteenth.’ Moreover, the verse quoted above, purportedly from scripture which would
precede Jñānanetra, to justify the view that there are only twelve, is most probably
corrupt, and in actual fact confirms that there are thirteen.

’ Kālikāstotra v. 6ab. See above, TĀv ad 3/234, where the entire verse is quoted,

which says: “O0 Mother of the Worlds, You are victorious. You are She by whose will
Time, which is Bhairava, emits the universe beginning with (Śiva, its universal) cause
up to (a tiny) insect.’ This line is also quoted above in TĀv ad 4/132 and 168.
“’ This is a standard way of referring in the Pratyabhijñā philosophy to Śiva’s freedom,
by virtue of which He manifests as all things without this compromising His oneness
and that of His manifest forms with Him and each other. What could be harder than
that? In the Krama system this power is appropriately identified with the fourth,

Inexplicable aspect of Kālī which, as Her essential nature, comprises the three cycles of
emanation, persistence and withdrawal of phenomena, that in that aspect are
experienced by Her through Her self-awareness as manifestations within Herself
at one

with Her, as are reflections in a mirror.

“’ Kālikāstotra verses 8a. Verse 8 and 9 are quoted together above. See note 4,670.

“’ Cf. above 1/216 for the use of this term in relation to the individual perceiver
(mātṛdaurātmya). The same ‘miserable state’ of the perceiver cuts him off from the
immediacy of the first moment of perception, when the light of consciousness shines in


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


which, like Rāhu’s head, reflects on reality (vastu) as divided, although [it is]

one.®" Thus, one should understand that the venerable Siddha here intends to

say that (consciousness) is twelve-fold. (In this way,) the contradiction is
removed by (its very) arising. As (it is said) here (about this): ‘you alone shine
radiantly as each process (of emanation and the rest)’. (Thus,) the intention
behind describing it in this way is to indicate that (the ‘one form of their
essential nature’) pervades (them). And (so it is said) in the same way that:
‘“There is some (undefinable) innate consciousness (sahajasaṁvittī)

which is intent on destroying what is generated from the duality between being

and nonbeing. O Goddess, (when it) is manifest (uditā), it is You Yourself Who
are victorious in the form (of the four goddesses) beginning with Jayā

(iayādya).

(Similarly,) it is taught by the venerable Hastanaya" that, ‘You

Yourself (O, Goddess) are also manifest in the form of (the four goddesses,)
its divine, prīstine purity, and reflects on its own true, infinite nature, unconditioned by
delimiting, dualistic thought constructs.

” According to Indian astrology, there is a planet called Rāhu, the form of which is a
severed head. Along with him there is Ketu, who is his body. The story goes that once
the gods and demons agreed together to churn the milky ocean from which the universe
arises. By their churning seven ‘jewels’ were produced from the ocean. The most

precious of them was amṛta — the Nectar of Immortality. The gods and demons lined up

to receive a portion; the gods first, then the demons. Soon it became apparent that it
would be finished by the time it was the demons’ turn, so one amongst them — Rāhu —
quietly took his place in between the gods of the Sun and Moon. When his turn came, he

managed to take a gulp, when the Sun and Moon noticed he was a demon and yelled to
Viṣṇu to stop him. Viṣṇu immediately hurled his discus at him, severing his head. But
he had already drunk some, so the two parts of the body continued to live, and to this
day move through the heavens as Rāhu — the head, and Ketu — the body. Rāhu is still
angry with the Sun and Moon, so that when he passes close to them in the sky, he tries

to gulp them down. He manages to obscure them for a while as they pass through his

throat, but then they emerge to shine as before. This is said to be the cause of solar and
lunar eclipses. Here Rāhu's head, engaged in swallowing the Sun of the means of

knowledge and the Moon of objectivity, is understood to illustrate how thought

repeatedly obscures these aspects of consciousness; and how, although this happens
again and again with each perception, consciousness repeatedly reemerges intact in its

original form, as the pure subjectivity that can never be the object of dichotomizing
thought.

“’ Kālikāṣtotra v. 10. According to Jayaratha, the first line reads: sadasadvibhedasūter
dalanaparā kāpi sahajasaṁvittiḥ | Thīs is the reading. The Nepalese MS reads:
sadasadvibhedaviṣṛtair dalanaparākāśasahajasamvittiḥ (k: ——saṁvitti). The second line

is the same.

’’ Jayaratha has just quoted from the Kālikāstotra by Jñānanetra, the founder of the
Kashmiri Krama system. He goes on to say that the same is also said in the Hastanaya,
which is a Krama Tantra. See following note.

The Hastanaya is almost certainly the unpublished Ūrmikaulārṇavatantra, which is

also called Bhogahasta (the Hand of Enjoyment). We read there in the surviving

fragments in manuscript: ‘in this venerable (scripture) called Bhogahasta, which has

emerged from the Ūrmikaulāgama (asmin śrībhogahastākhye ūrmikaulāgamotthite [-

taṁ] l| 1/136cd). The colophons begin: (this is chapter so and so in the scripture) that has

TANTRĀLOKA

beginning with Jayā (jiayādya)." Moreover, here (what follows) is the proper
explanation in accord with our tradition (svakrama): You are victorious in the

form (of the four goddesses) beginning with Jayā, who are the four energies of
the first letter (A).


As scripture says, beginning with:

‘Now (the following topic concerns how) the supreme, pure Brahman

has assumed the state of the first letter (A)’


And continues:

‘Ambikā is below. Then come the three energies simultaneously,
namely, Jyeṣṭhā, Raudrī and Vāmā who is like a sleeping serpent. Raudrī has

(the triangular) form of a water chestnut and the other® (Jyeṣṭhā) that of a
straight line. They should be known to be the (universal) cause (of all the

come down through the tradition (krama) of the venerable Bhogahasta that has come
forth from the venerable sacred seat of Kaulagiri and brought down (to earth) by the
venerable Matsyendranātha (sśrīśrībhogahastakramāyāte śrīkaulagiripīthavinirgate
śrīmīnapādā-vatārite). It teaches:

mahākaulārṇavaṁ guhyaṁ saptadhā khecarārcitam |
bhogahastakramāmnāyaṁ yoginīcakragocaram |l (ibid. 1/7).
‘the tradition of the Bhogahastakrama, which is the great secret Kaula ocean,
worshipped seven times by the Skyfarers and has as its expanse the Circles of Yoginīs.’

sarvaṁ samatayā bhãti bhogahastaṁ tu taṁ viduḥ |vibhuḥ] l| 1/73cd
‘Bhogahasta (the Hand of Enjoyment) is the state in which everything
manifests in the perfect equality of oneness.”
bhogo bhairava ity ukto hastaḥ śaktiḥ [śakti] parā smṛtāḥ ||
yāmalaṁ vai [vya] jagat sarvaṁ sṛjate saṁharaty api |
bhogahastaṁ tu taṁ vidyād yo bhuṅkte viśvamaṇḍalam || 1/77cd-78.
‘Bhoga’ is said to be Bhairava and ‘hasta’ the supreme power. The conjoined

pair (yāmala) emanates and also withdraws the universe. Know that the Hand of
Enjoyment is that which enjoys all things.”

“ The four goddesses

are Jayā (Victory), Vijayā (Complete Victory), Ajitā

(Ūndefeated) and Aparājitā (Undefeated by Others). They form a standard group which
is well known in the Kaula Tantras of various schools, including Trika and the latter

Śrīvidyā, as well as the Krama. They appear in the Vāma Tantras as the four attendants
of Tumburu Bhairava, the main form of Bhairava of the Vāma Tantras. See Dyczkowski

1988: p. 36-38, 149-150. Jayaratha quotes a reference from the Hastanaya to the four
goddesses Ambikā etc., thus implicitly identifying them with the four, Jayā etc. These
four goddesses are the embodiments of four aspects of the letter A, which is a major

symbol in the Trika Tantras, as it is in the Kālīkrama (see above, note 3,636 at 3/202cd203ab).
Ṛead tathāparā for tathā parā.
“ Concerning the deployment of these energies in the letter A and how they are parts of
it, see above, note 3,210 ad 3/66cd-67ab (67).


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


letters). Everything comes from them. When the intermediate level (parāpara)
is reached, they are said to be the (forces called) Śānti etc., which are Śānti,
Vidyā, Pratiṣṭhā, and Nivṛtti is said to be the other. They are present (āviṣṭa) in
the Five Voids, and their abodes (āspada) are on the plane of the Supreme
Self. These same (energies) in their lower (apara) form are the secret energies

Jayā and the rest.”

The teachers explain, (the first teacher) was initially graced by these
(four goddesses) in the (sacred seat of) Kāmarūpa, by being given the sacrificial
food (caruka) (that he ate, and thereby received the liberating initiation). (The

interpretation offered by others that the word ‘jayā’ refers to the nature of

goddess) as victorious (jayana), and that (the word) ādya means (not ‘and the

rest” but) the form which is present in the initial aspect, (and as such) “You are
victoriousʼ is (incorrect, and indeed) most sinful (because it is misleading). One
understands such (verses in Jñānanetra’s Kālikāstotra) in the same way:

‘Having divided the form consisting of thirteen (aspects) into five parts,
one by one, the Mother Who is the saviour of the universe and utters forth the

Divine Current (of the teachers), triumphs.’

It is established that, as the lineage of teachers (gurukrama) is actually

such (that it originated from the Divine Current initiated by the Goddess
Herself), this teaching concerning it is true (and correct). There (in that case)
also, the root scripture is one’s own self-reflective awareness (svavimarśa), and

(sound) reasoning (associated with meditative practice) (yukti). Accordingly,
both of these were explained previously. Thus, in this way, the supreme

The thirty-six principles are divided into five spheres of energies, which I translate as

‘forcesʼ (kalā). Nivṛtti (Completion) comprises just the Earth Principle, Pratisṭhā (the
Established One) the principles from Water to Nature; Vidyā (Knowledge) the

principles from Puruṣa (the Individual Śoul) to Māyā and Śānti (Tranquillity) extends
from Pure Knowledge up to the principle of Śakti. Śāntyātītā (Beyond Tranquillity)
corresponds to just the Śiva principle. See Chapter Ten below for a detailed exposition
of the Five Forces. Although only four are mentioned here, they are related to the Five

Voids. Presumably the fifth Void is transcendental Śiva. The four forces span the

expanse of immanence, the fifth, the highest transcendental one, is presumably the
supreme (para) level, where the letter A is formed from the four energies. The rest are

below.
“ The Tantrasadbhāva refers to these goddesses many times, and discusses their nature
at length as elements of the formation of the Triangle in this way (cf. above TĀv ad
3/65cd-66ab (66)), so one would expect them to have been drawn from there. However,
these lines are not found in the extant manuscripts.

“ See above, note above ad 2/2 concerning this sacrificial food (caru).
“ We have already noted above (note 4,648) that the lineages of teachers are divided
into three currents (ogha) of ‘divine’ (divya), ‘accomplished’ (siddha) and ‘human’
(mānuṣya) teachers.

“ Kālikāstotra v. 16.

TANTRĀLḶOKA

authority (and means of knowledge) (pramāṇa), which is (this) insight

(pratyaya), unfolds without impediment (bādha).

Surely, (an opponent may rejoin,) let that be (as you say), however, the

venerable Kramastotra does not bear this kind of explanation, the intention is to

say there that consciousness arises in thirteen ways (not twelve), as each

goddess is praised with one verse each in this hymn; what (could be) the

apparent intention to praise the venerable Yamakālī with two verses, rejecting

(the reading) ‘sukālī"" and (replacing it with) the wrong reading ‘bhavānī

Do the other commentators agree here on this reading? It is said here (in
response to this objection), who has said that each goddess is praised here with
(just) one verse? The venerable Kālāgnirudrakālī is also praised (in two
verses, of which the following) is the second:

‘I salute the Kālī of the Rudra of the Fire of Time Who is inflamed with
thousands of (fiery) forms (that rise out of) the Abode of Fire, She Who
destroys the entire universe and everywhere devours the body of death.”
If you say: “well then, what is this seeming enthusiasm that the

venerable Yamakālī (is praised) in two verses? And ‘This verse also (has not

been written by Erakanātha,) it has been imagined (kalpita) by you!"” (We reply

that) this is not so, because (I have) seen this verse in the commentary

(vivaraṇa) written in venerable Hrasvanātha’s own hand (svalipi).° One

observes the (same) inversion (vyatyāsa) of the order of the readings and verses

on the part of all the commentators at every step, so why this aversion to the

“ In this way, Jayaratha is tacitly admitting that Abhinavagupta’s teaching, which

admits only twelve Kālīs, is the result of personal insight. Moreover, it is reasonable, if
one accepts this there are no contradictions, even though the scriptures and the earlier
Kṛrama teachers appear to be saying that there are thirteen, not twelve Kālīs.

Read sukāī for ṣvakālī.

“’ Unfortunately, up to now the Kramastotra has not been recovered and is most
probably lost, so we only know it from quotations, most of which are by Jayaratha here

in his commentary. From what he says here, it appears, according to him, that there

were two verses in the Kramastotra dedicated to Yamakālī. In his commentary however

he only quotes one (see above, comm. on 4/151). But, as the opponent asserts, Sukālī

precedes Yamakālī in the more commonly accepted sequence of thirteen Kālīs. The
opponent alleges that this verse was indeed dedicated to Sukālī, but someone tampered
with the texts, replacing her name with bhavānī, which would be metrically possible.
Cf. equivalent CGC 231. Sanderson (2007: 353-4), observing that all the sources,
including the Kramastotra, prior to Abhinava refer to the Kālīs as thirteen, not twelve,

‘yet Abhinavagupta presents a text of the Kramastotra that teaches only twelve, lacking

Sukālī between Yamakālī (the fifth) and Mṛtyukālī (the seventh). This revision . . . was

achieved by Abhinavagupta or a predecessor, by expunging the reading sukalim in the

verse devoted to this Kālī and putting bhavānim in its place, a non-specific name of the
Goddess that enabled the verse to be read as a second one on Yamakālī, the deity who

immediately precedes Sukālī.”

’ This means that Jayaratha had seen the autograph of Hrasvanātha’s commentary on

the Kramastotra. Clearly, the Kramastotra was an important text for this Krama

tradition from early on in its development.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


reading we have seen (in the manuscripts)? Surely (then the opponent may
rejoin), why do you not reflect on which reading is correct (sādhu) and which

one is not? If a reading is a reasonable one (and makes sense) (samila), then

that is the correct one, whereas another is not. (To which we reply) that we
observe that here in both cases, according to the sequence (of verses of the
Kramastotra) (we have) presented, the root (reason) (mila) (for accepting the

reading) is equally valid in both cases (so this is not a criterion in this case).

Thus, the reason for accepting one (rather than the other) is that it accords with

the teaching (we have received from) our teachers.” As our grand-teacher has
said: ‘the instruction a teacher has imparted to someone is liberating for him.’

So whatever is said here (about this) by those who have not seen a teacher and

are not practiced in the traditional (teachings) concerning the scripture
(transmitted by a true lineage of teachers), devoid of (any insightful) reflection

(vimarśa) of their own and are not pleasing to the deities,® should (simply) be
ignored. So now enough of this great audacity of revealing what is extremely

secret.

Conclusion: the goddess Kālī
What is said to be (the way consciousness) operates (kalana) here (in

this case)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Five Operations (kalana) of Kālakarṣiṇī Kālī

šṇī āīi Ṁḷ aa ũtĩr st ha 1 2.93 1|
e|UECIAIHEUEIĒEZGĒEI

saṀTt#īaāī u 2.9% 1

āīē: TJTRTTTTYTIĀTTTI TĪRGTHT I g4, I

kṣepo jñānaṁ ca saṁkhyānaṁ gatir nāda iti kramāt || 173 ||
svātmano bhedanaṁ kṣepo bheditasyāvikalpanam |
jñānaṁ vikalpaḥ saṁkhyānam anyato vyatibhedanāt || 174 |
gatiḥ svarūpārohitvaṁ pratibimbavad eva yat |
nādaḥ ṣvātmaparāmarśaśeṣatā tadvilopanāt || 175 ||

“ Jayaratha is now tackling the problem as to why the sequence in which Abhinava
presents the Kālīs is not the commonly accepted one. Again, he is hard pressed to
establish that Abhinava received this sequential order from his teachers. We have
observed already that it is most likely that Abhinava did change it to suit his exegesis.

“’ Read yathāsvagurūpadeśa- for yathāsvaṁ gurūpadeśa-.
“ Read devānām apriyair for devānāṁ priyair.

TANTRĀLOKA

(The senses of the term ‘operates’ (kalana) is that of its root ‘kalʼ,

which are)” in due order: casting forth (kṣepa), knowledge (jūñāna),
enumeration (saṁkhyāna), movement (gati) and sound (nāda). (What is
meant by) ‘casting forth’ (in this context) is the (process of) separation

(bhedana) (of outer reality) from one’s own nature. ‘Knowledge’ (jñāna) is
abstention from forming thought constructs in relation to (this reality thus)
divided. ‘Enumeration’ (sarṅīkhyāna) is (on the contrary, the formation of)
thought constructs, determined by the mutual exclusion (of the subject and
the many objects from it and one another). ‘Movement’ (gati) is mounting
(of all things) into one’s own nature in the manner of a reflection (in a

mirror). ‘Sound’ (nāda) is the reflective awareness of one’s own nature,
which is all that remains by destroying these (forms of perception).”
(173cd-175)
“’’ Abhinavagupta now focuses on how consciousness ‘operates’ — kalana — the phases

of this process. He does this by explaining from the perspective of consciousness, the
standard lexical meanings of the root kal, from which this term is derived. Cf. above,

3/252cd-253ab and commentary. Cf. also TSā p. 30-31: kalanaṁ ca gatiḥ kṣepo

gaṇanaṁ bhogīkaraṇaṁ śabdanaṁ ṣvãtmalayīkaraṇaṁ ca | yadāhuḥ s’

rājaguravaḥ kṣepāj jñānāc ca kālī kalanavaśatayāthaī.. | iti | eṣa ca arthaḥ tatra tatra
madviracite vivaraṇe p. 31) prakaraṇastotrādau vitatya
vīkṣyaḥ | na atirahasyam ekatra
khyāpyaṁ na ca sarvathā gopyam iti hi asmadguravaḥ |
‘(The sense of the word) ‘operates’ (kalana) is ‘movement’ (gati), ‘casting
forth’ (kṣepa), ʻknowledge’ (jñāna), ‘enumeration’ (gaṇana), ‘make into an object of
experience’ (bhogīkaraṇa), ‘resound’ (śabdana) and ‘dissolving into oneself”
(svātmalayīkaraṇa). As the venerable teacher Bhūtirāja has said: “(She is called) Kālī
because she casts forth and knows, because the operations (of consciousness) are under
her control.” This subject should be examined at length in my commentary (vivaraṇa) to
the Prakaraṇastotra eṭc. (i.e. the Kramastotra). According to our venerable teacher, one

should not explain what is most secret (all) in one place, nor should it be concealed
completely.”

“’ This is the meaning of the expression svarāpārohitvaṁ pratibimbavad eva. However,

it appears from his commentary that Jayaratha understands it to mean ‘(the process of)
appropriation of one’s own nature like a reflection (in a mirror)ʼ.

“’ The phases of cognitive consciousness are set into operation by its innate power,
hypostatized as the goddess Kālī, who thus performs them. They are five, as are the five

meanings of the root kal, which are as follows. 1) The process commences with the
external differentiated manifestation of the Light of inner, undifferentiated

consciousness that ‘casts forth’ the universe as if projecting out of itself, without

dividing it up, because it is all nothing but the shining of the Light of consciousness. 2)

In the next phase, reflective awareness, free of thought constructs, emerges along with
the Light, contemplating its manifestations as its own nature. This is called

‘knowledge’. 3) In the following phase, individual entities within the sparkling radiance
of the manifestation of the Light of consciousness are differentiated from each other as

objects and perceivers. This takes place by the process of conceptualization, through
mutual exclusion of one thing from everything else, and its ascertainment by the
ascription of thought constructs that label it. This is called ‘enumeration’. 4) The fourth

stage marks the beginning of the return to the original pure conscious state, by

perceiving that all that has thus been conceptually labelled is within the subject, who

conceives these conceptual distinctions. Thus, they are appropriated by the perceiver as


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

(According to Pāṇini, there are four roots ‘kal’, with separate meanings.

Thus, the sense of the cognate roots) kal, kil and bil is ‘casting forth’ (kṣepa),
‘kal’ (in the sense of) ‘movement’ (gati), ‘kal’ (in the sense of) ‘enumeration’
(saṁkhyāna), and ‘kal’ (in the sense of) ‘sound’ (nāda). (This) group of four

roots has these five meanings, as (the sense of) ‘movement’ (comprises both)

‘knowledge’ (jñāna) and ‘appropriation’ (prāpti). This is explained in due order
(with the words) beginning with ‘in due order°. 1) (‘Casting forth’ in this
context means) ‘separation’ (bhedana), that is, (the act of) pouring out
externally

(of

the

universe

of

the

manifestations

of

consciousness).

2) (‘Knowledge’, which here means) ‘abstention from forming thought
constructsʼ, is the reflective awareness (of what has been manifest externally)

as one with one’s own nature. 3) (That which has been) ‘divided’ is reality (in
the form of) subjects and objects etc., due to the mutual exclusion (apohana) of
one another (in such a way that the notion arises that) ‘this is this and not this’,

by establishing (each individual entity) according (to its own) fixed determined

(nature), and so is ‘enumeration (saṁkhyāna)’, which is ‘(the formation of)

thought constructs'. 4) ‘“Movement’ (gati) here (in this case means), in a
secondary sense, (the act of) appropriation. Itis due to that that the reality which
has been divided up (into individual entities and their perceivers) ‘mounts’ onto
one's own nature, which is consciousness, in the sense that it appropriates it. Its
condition (bhāva) (expressed by the abstract noun ‘mountingʼ) is its actual

nature (tattva). This (appropriation) is not like, as one says, ‘the mat (belongs
to) Devadatta’ (in which case Devadatta and the mat remain distinct), (rather) it
is ‘in the manner of a reflection (in a mirror)ʼ, that is, even though it is not

separate from it, it manifests as (if it were) separate from it.'™ This is the overall
meaning. 5) ‘By destroying’, that is, removing ‘these’ (forms of) perception,
nondiscursive and the rest, ‘the reflective awareness of one’s own nature is

all that remains’, because it is just the resonance (of consciousness). This is the
(specific) meaning, whereas the overall sense is that that (destruction relates)

only to that which is separate (from consciousness).”'

belonging to himself, not to an external reality, and so everything manifests as a part of
him, as are thoughts in the mind, or reflections in a mirror. This phase is called

‘movement’, in the sense of the movement or state of phenomena as states of
consciousness, from which is derived its other meaning, which is knowledge. 5) In the
final phase, this inner image of objectivity within the perceiver also fades away, leaving
behind the resonance of the pure, objectless, reflective awareness of the perceiving
subjectivity of pure consciousness.

Thus, according to Jayaratha, the sense of ‘gati’ is to ‘lay hold’ or ‘appropriate’, in

the manner a reflection is ‘appropriated’ by a miror, namely, as one with it, although it
appears to be separate from it.

"" Juṣṭ the sense of duality and separation is destroyed, not the essential nature of things

in themselves, which is the one pure consciousness. In this way, the operation of
consciousness brings about the disappearance of all that is made manifest, and shines in

its original form as pure consciousness.

In his Kramanayapradīpikā (p. 11), Swami Lakshmanjoo explains that the five
meanings of the root kal indicate five meanings of the name Kālī, who is the supreme

goddess of consciousness (saṅviddevi), even as they denote five complementary ways
in which She operates (kalayati), and hence aspects of Her nature. These are:

TANTRĀLOKA

Now he comes to the point.

The Dynamism of Kālakarṣiṇī Kāḹī, Mātṛsadbhāva and Vāmeśvarī

iti pañcavidhām enāṁ kalanāṁ kurvatī parā |
devī kālī tathā kālakarṣiṇī
ceti kathyate || 176 ||
Thus, the Goddess Parā, Who performs these five operations
(kalanā), is called Kālī and Kālakarṣiṇī (the Destroyer of Time).

1) (‘Casting forth’), which denotes the supreme goddess of consciousness as
the one who causes all things, that is, subject, means and object of knowledge, that
abide as one with one’s own nature, to pour forth in an external state (hahirbhāva).

2) (‘Knowledge’) denotes the supreme goddess of consciousness as the one
who contemplates this universe, consisting of subject, means and object of knowledge,
as one with Her own nature, although it has been made manifest as if outside it.
3) (‘Enumeration’) denotes Kālī, the wave of consciousness, as the supreme
goddess who operates in such a way that what has been divided, namely, reality, in the

form of the universe of subject and object etc., establishes (each entity) as having a

fixed (determined) form by mutual exclusion (of one thing from another), as (for

example) ‘this is a jar, not a clothʼ.

4) (‘Movement’, here in the secondary sense, of ‘appropriation’) denotes the
supreme goddess Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī Kālī, as one who operates in such a way that she
establishes the specific nature of phenomenal reality, consisting of subject, means and

object of knowledge, in the mirror of her own consciousness, as separate from it within
her own nature, although it is not.

5) (‘Soundʼ) denotes Kālī as supreme consciousness who operates in such a

way that she contemplates everything as the reflective awareness of her own nature, (in
the form of) the residue that remains of all perceptions, whether nonconceptual
(avikalpa) or otherwise (savikalpa), by (fusing together and) contemplating
(anusaṁdhāna) (in her consciousness) the five cosmic functions (kṛtya) of emanation,

persistence, withdrawal, obscuration and grace. Swami Lakshmanjoo explains that the
Supreme Goddess of consciousness, who is complete and unobstructed in every way,
contemplates all perception, conceptual and otherwise, in the form of these five cosmic

functions. She then merges into the essence of the Fourth state of consciousness, which
is the reflective awareness of her own nature.

Sanderson (2006: 64) explains the same as follows: ‘the autonomous
consciousness which is the Absolute is called Kālī (i) because it throws, in the sense that
it projects the universe, causing it to appear as though beyond it (‘kal” ‘to throw’
[kṣepe1); 2) because through it the projection returns to (‘goes to’) its identity as
cognition (‘kal’ ‘to go’ [gatau]); ) 3) because it knows the projected in the sense that it

represents it as identical with its own identity (‘kal’ ‘to know’ [gatau]); 4) because it
enumerates the projection, in the sense that it distinguishes each element from all the
others within its own unity (‘kal’ ‘to count’ [ṣaṁkhyāne]), and 5) because it sounds in

the sense that when it has dissolved the projection it continues as the resonance of
internal self-awareness (‘kalʼ ‘to utter a sound [śahde]).”


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

(She is called) the goddess Parā (Supreme) because (this name is) in

accord with Her nature. This is the intended (sense).

Theṣse are not Her only names, there are others also. Thus, he says:


TTTRHTATKTITTI
āTTTHTqṬ I

GTāē-cifeī
JHTṬCd’ TRCTYĀTT I 9. I
arafr

mātṛsadbhāvasaṁjñāsyās tenoktā yat pramātṛṣu |
etāvad antasaṁvittau pramātṛtvaṁ sphuṭībhavet || 177 ||
vāmeśvarīti śabdena proktā śrīniśisañcare |

Thus, She is called Mātṛsadbhāva” (the Essence of (AIl Perceiving)

Subjects) because the subjectivity within the (seven orders of) subjects is

clearly evident (only) within this ultimate level of consciousness
(antasaṁviṭti). In the venerable Niśisaṁcara she is called Vāmeśvarī.
(177-178ab)

‘Thus She’, the Goddess Parā, Who is called by various names, such as
Kālī, is said to be (also) ‘called Mātṛsadbhāva’ (the Essence of (AlIl

Perceiving) Subjects) ‘within this ultimate level of consciousness’, that is,

within consciousness engaged in the process of attaining each correspondingly
(higher degree) of excellence at the (supreme) conclusion (paryanta) of the
(concomitantly progressive unfolding of the) Twelve Goddesses, ‘because the
subjectivity, that is, the agency of the act of perception (pramitikriyā) ʻwithin
the (seven orders of) subjects’, beginning with the fully obscured (subject)
(sakala), ‘īs clearly evident’ (there). (In other words,) it is the essence
(sadbhāva) of these subjects (mātṛ), which is (their) state of oneness with
supreme consciousness, which is self-luminous and free.® As is said:

‘It is taught that this is the supreme essence (sadbhāva) of the

‘The venerable Nisisaṁcara’ is the Niśāṭana. As is said there:
” The Mantras of these two goddesses of supreme consciousness are given below, see
30/43d-50ab.
7 Abhinava has just said that Parā, equated with Kālasaṁkarṣinī, is called

Mātr̥sadbhāva. As before, he finds this name in the MV 8/41ab, where it refers to Parā

as the essence of the mātṛkāṣ (also quoted in 3/68cd-70 (69-71ab)). Abhinava gives the

same name (having seen it in an original source in this sense) to Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. See

above, notes to TĀv ad 1/6, 3/68ab-70ab (68cd-70) and 3/109 (109cd-110ab). He adds
here that she is called Vāmeśvarī in the Niśisaṅcara.
Swami Lakshmanjoo explains that Kālī (i.e. Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī) is called Mātṛsadbhāva
(the Essence of (All Perceiving) Subjects) because ‘by taking the essential being of this

goddess Kālī as its foundation, the light of the subjectivity, that is, consciousness of all
the phenomenal universe, becomes clearly evident.’ KNP p. 11.

MV 8/41ab; also quoted above in TĀv ad 3/68cd-70 (69-71ab).

TANTRĀLOKA
‘This

the

Kaulikī

Vidyā

(ice.

Mantra),

which

bestows

every

accomplishment (siddhi). It has come forth from the presence of the God of the
gods along the path of (His) power (śakti), which is the descent (of the Goddess)

Vāmeśvarī, and become manifest.”

Surely, (an opponent may ask), how can the oneness (of consciousness
you teach as being ultimately) real (tāttvika), in such a way that that unified
(ekatara) reflective awareness (you call) the venerable Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī,
Mātṛṣadbhāva and so on, is possible, if by assuming the form of emanation and
the rest, there is a difference between (its) manifestations, and so, sequential as
it is, is extremely varied? With this doubt in mind, he says:

zc?j graaaī āfdāftrīsī fāT]T I Q9¢ 1

JTĀTTTT JTTTGĀTATGrĪTTSTĪ T I 2.9, I

itthaṁ dvãdaśadhã saṁvit tiṣṭhantĩ viśvamãtr̥ṣu |l 178 |I
ekaiveti na ko ʻpy asyāḥ kramasya niyamaḥ kvacit |
kramābhāvān na yugapat tadabhāvāt kramo ‘pi na || 179 ||
kramākramakathātītaṁ ṣaṅvitattvaṁ sunirmalam |
In this way, consciousness, that abides twelve-fold within all
(perceiving) subjects (mmātṛ), is one only, and so is not subject in any way to
succession (krama). Again, because there is no succession (of differing
elements), there is also no simultaneity (between the appearance of
differing elements), and as there is no (simultaneity), there is also no
succession. The principle of consciousness, extremely pure, transcends all

talk of succession and its absence (kramākramakathātīta). (178cd-180ab)

7Both names mean the same, that is, ‘(the Tantra concering the Vow of) Wandering
at Night’. Also called the Vow of Knowledge (vidyāvrata) (see above, note 2,7), the
practice of ‘Wandering at Night’ is the perambulation of Kaula ascetics to and in sacred

sites in search of Yoginīs, by uniting with whom and eating their sacred food, they are
said to attain yogic powers (siddhi) and even liberation. See Dyczkowski 2009 vol 1, p.

514-518.

Concerning Vāmeśvarṁī and the goddesses associated with Her, understood from the
Krama perspective, see Dyczkowski 1986: 129-130; 1992: 56, 670, 182 and 2009 intro.

1,39. Swami Lakshmanjoo understands Vāmeśvaṁī here to be Tripurasundarī. He

explains: ‘(the Goddess) is called Vāmeśvarī in the Niśātana and other scriptures
because this goddess, abandoning her fierce (raudra), that is, frightening process
(krama) (i.e. form) which destroys all things, assumes the process (i.e. form) which
bestows joy to all, and so is manifest in the form of Vāmeśvarī, that is, Tripurasundarī’.

(KNP p. 11)

Swami Lakṣhmanjoo explains (KNP p. 45-46): “The sense is that although the

goddess of consciousness, who has twelve forms associated with the perceiver, abides

within all perceivers, that is to say, in the wheels of the subject, means and object of
knowledge, even so, in reality, she has only one nature (svarūpa). In reality, (there is) no


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

‘In this way’, in the aforementioned manner, Parā Herself, the Goddess

of Consciousness, is present ‘within all (perceiving) subjects'. The (use of the)

plural assumes the sense of ‘etc.’ (The point being that the Goddess of
Consciousness is present in all things, not just the perceiving subjects,) and so,
because it includes implicitly the means of knowledge and the rest, although

(consciousness) manifests twelve-fold as the field of the subject, means of

knowledge and the rest, it is ‘one only, without a second. This is the meaning.
The intended sense is that even though (consciousness) manifests as all things, it
does not fall from its own essential nature. Thus, it has no fixed sequence

(krama), such that it must manifest only as twelve-fold. Although supreme

consciousness manifests in association with the limiting adjuncts of (the cycle
of) emanation and the rest, even so, in accord with the dictum: ‘this Self has
shone forth (just) once (sakṛt)’,™ the manifestation of its own essential nature is
not conditioned (and divided up by it), and so, like a flash of lightning, there are

no gaps in its shining. Thus, within its own nature, it is not conditioned (and
divided) by time. So what occasion could there be for succession, which is of
that nature,

(to arise

within consciousness)? And so, there is also no

simultaneity within’" (consciousness), (as) that arises when there is a contrast
(with something else), like that between two scintillating particles of (heated)
iron. There is nothing else in relation to which it may be contrasted, and so with
what could there be simultaneity? Thus, this (consciousness) is not associated
with succession or its contrary. He says that (with the words) beginning with,

‘because there is no succession’.

Surely (one may ask,) here (in everyday life,) phenomena are

necessarily associated with succession (as time) and its absence (as space), s0

how is it that the principle of consciousness (with which phenomena are one) is
said to be beyond them? So (in response,) he says that (supreme consciousness,
devoid of both, is) ‘extremely pure’, whereas the perceiver subject to Māyā

(māyāpramātṛ) (in the deep sleep of) emptiness and the rest"™ is not pure (in

this sense), and (so) is conditioned by time, as the succession of the

manifestations of different states, due to the difference between the

manifestations of the (phases of) the activity (of a lifetime), beginning with

succession (krama) of (states in) this Supreme Goddess in whatever place or state she
may be. However, there is also no state of simultaneity (yugapadbhāva) within Her.

From the point of view of reality, this completely pure and most excellent place of the

Goddess of Consciousness is far removed from all talk of succession (krama) or its

absence (akrama). The goddess Kālī, going beyond the state of succession and its
absence, shines brilliantly on (this) most excellent plane (of supreme consciousness).”

See note above in TĀv ad 1/57.

'!! The individual perceiver below the level of Māyā experiences himself as separate

from the object, because he identifies with the psychophysical organism he inhabits,
which is objective and hence separate from other objects. The Māyā perceiver, because
of this identification, is subject to the three states of consciousness, namely, waking,

dreaming and deep sleep. The first two correspond to the activity of the body, senses

and mind, witnessed by the embodied perceiver (dehapramātṛ) and that of the vital
breath (prāṇapramātr̥). Deep sleep is the domain of the ‘void perceiver”
(śūnyapramātṛ). See IP 3/2/13-17 for a definition and description of these states of
consciousness.

TANTRĀLOKA

birth. Perceiving oneself in relation to the cessation of the manifestation of a
previous state, as manifesting accordingly as having past, it makes (things)

manifest as present in relation to that past (condition). In relation to the present
manifestation, it establishes another future state, which consists of the
manifestation of its alteration (pariṇāma) and other (forms of change). (Even)

those who believe that time has an (independent) existence of its own, consider
the simultaneity of particular entities, such as the (the colour) blue and the like,
to exist in relation to oneself. Thus, the manifestation of succession and

simultaneity pertains to that (individual perceiver, not consciousness). ” As is

said (in the Īśvarapratyabhijñā):

‘In every case, the difference between (successive) manifestations

(ābhāsabheda) is also in the form of temporal succession. (This conditioned)
discontinuous manifestation pertains to (lower individual perceivers identified
with the) Void (of deep sleep) etc., not to (the unconditioned) perceiver

(himself), who shines once (and forever) (sakṛt).’

Surely (one may ask,) if that is the case, how can that supreme
consciousness (be worshipped)? The act of worship (pūjā) is based on
succession, consisting as it does of (various phases), such as (the initial)

invocation (and drawing the deity down into its representation) (āvāhana) and
dismisṣsal (at the end). With this doubt in mind, he says:

Consciousness

is here described as ‘extremely pure’. This means that it is not at the

level of the individual subject in the realm of the duality of Māyā, who experiences the
manifestation of phenomena successively and consequentially, in such a way that he

experiences that things are taking place in the present in relation to the past, and those of
the future in relation to the present. The object appears to manifest independently of
consciousness, and so the change to which it is subject from moment to moment gives

rise to the sense of time passing. Pure consciousness is free of objectivity and so is
timeless. Identifying with the psychophysical organism, which is objective, and
perceiving that its previous states have passed, we have a sense that time is passing for
us. It is in relation to that sense of time passing that we experience the present time as
being the present. Pure consciousness is self-existent. It does not depend on the body,

which is its manifestation in that form, and there is nothing apart from consciousness
which could ‘sully’ it with objectivity, and so it is not experienced successively as being
such previously and is now different, and so is not subject to temporal succession.

” TP 2/1/6. The expression here is ‘sakṛt — literally ‘once’. ‘Once’ in this sense is not

an event set in time. The true Self manifests ‘once’ and forever, that is, eternally. See

above note in TĀv ad 1/57. Utpaladeva explains in his brief commentary (vṛtti): “In
every object, diversified manifestation determines the appearance of temporal
succession (exclusively) for the knowing subject who identifies himself with the void

(experienced in deep sleep and the like), the body and so on. Indeed, apart from
memory, what was manifest in the past (prākkāla) does not shine in the same manner at
the present moment, and it is with reference to his own present (svavartamānāpekṣayā)
that the subject may use the notions of past and future as everyday experience. On the

contrary, for the (true) knowing subject who shines uninterruptedly, once and forever
(sakṛdvibhātasya), there is no temporal differentiation, neither in himself nor as regards

objects, since, as the shining is never interrupted, it is not possible to speak of
repetition.’ Torella’s translation.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


[eiaṇzaitE'ḵvuEfEEH

tad asyāḥ saṁvido devyā yatra kvāpi pravartanam || 180 ||
tatra tādātmyayogena pūjā pūrṇaiva vartate |
Worship is complete (and perfect) (pūrṇā) by virtue of the union
(yoga) of the oneness (of all that is perceived within consciousness as one

with it), wherever this Goddess of Consciousness operates.”™ (180cd-181ab)

The main form of worship is the condition (avasthāna) (that arises)
wherever
one
lays
hold
of
(and
rests
within)
consciousness

(saṁvidavaṣṭambha). (According to us this is the main and most authentic form
of worship, it is) not (the outer ritual which involves a sequence of rites,) such
as the invocation (of the deity) and the rest. This is the purport (of what he is
saying here). As is said:
‘In whichever most excellent (inner) centre (cakra) one experiences the

contentment of the bliss of that (gentle) touch, the Yoga of laying hold of (and

reposing within consciousness) (avasṭambhayoga) of that is said to be the
prescribed form of worship (pājāvidhi).’”"
7 Cf. above, 4/121cd-122ab and commentary, with reference to VBh 147. The practice
of outer ritual, which involves the application of the power to act (kriyāśakti) that

operates in the sphere of the Individual Means, has no place in the sphere of the
Empowered Means, which is that of the power of knowledge (jñānaśakti). How then is
the worship of the Twelve Kaālīs to be performed here? How is their Mantra to be recited
in this internal worship? How should they be visualized (dhyāna)? How are the

offerings made to the sacrificial fire and the rest of the rites to be performed? As an

answer to these implicit questions, Abhinava provides their ‘internal’ equivalents,

practiced mentally and in the sphere of perception proper to the Empowered Means,

through which thought is purified and prepared for the realisation of higher
nonconceptual (nirvikalpa) consciousness.
7!1 ṭranslate the term ‘avaṣṭambha’ as ‘laying hold’. A more literal translation would be
‘checking’ or ‘blocking’. The practice may be equally external or internal. Outwardly,
the ‘most excellent centre’ is the genitals. It is the locus of the ‘most excellent touch’
(sparśavara), that generates the blissful experience of sexual arousal. Accordingly, this

place is called ‘the Abode of Bliss (ānandadhāman). The same bliss may also be
experienced in other centres (cakra) within the subtle body by the ‘touch’ of
Kuṇḍalinī’s blissful spiritual energy. This verse teaches that the yogi should not be
carried away by lust or other such emotions. Instead, he should ‘lay hold’ or ‘block’ the
sense of contentment that accompanies the blissful experience, which is essentially that

of consciousness. The practice is a way of worshipping Deity. If all the yogi experiences
is sexual arousal, he has not been able to catch hold of the spiritual consciousness that
develops at the beginning and ‘block it, to prevent it from degenerating into lust.

7! This verse refers to the inner practice of Yoga in the course of sexual union. The bliss

of union is in actual fact the experience of Kuṇḍalinī’s rise through the subtle body of

the conjoined partners, although they may not realise Kuṇḍalinī is the rising breath

(udānaprāṇa) that ascends through the central channel (suṣumnā) when the inhaled and
exhaled breaths are sucked into it, as it were, in the intensity of climax. The stations of

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask,) it is said everywhere that there can

be no worship without Mantra, and if Mantras are separate from consciousness,

then the worship which is the condition (avasthāna) of oneness with
consciousness is lost. Whereas, if they are not separate (from consciousness),
should not (another) separate teaching be imparted concerning them? Taking
this question into account, he says (the following), as announced in the initial

enunciation, in order to reveal (the true nature of) the vitality of Mantra

(mantravīrya) as pervaded by the dawning of the cycle of consciousness.

The Vitality of Mantra (mantravīrya)
its ascent are marked by the inner configurations or ‘wheels’ of energies it ‘touches’ and
thereby activates, as centres of the blissful experience of ‘touch’. This process begins at
the lowest centre in the genitals, and proceeds upwards to finally ‘touch’ and make
contact with the energies of supreme consciousness, and merge into them as their all-

embracing plenitude (piūrṇatā). One-pointedly and devoutly catching hold and resting
within Śiva consciousness in this way is one of the highest, most perfect forms of
worship.

The following passage, which extends from 4/181cd to 193, concerns the Heart and
the dynamics of its pulsation. An earlier version is found in the Mālinīvijayavārtika,

which is translated below. In this version, Abhinava refers only to the operation of the

energies of SAUḤ in the process of emanation, in the forward order, and that of
withdrawal, in the reverse order, which in the TĀ is represented by the energies of

KHPHREM (see below 4/189cd-190). The expansion of the former and the contraction

of the latter together constitute the resonance (dhvani) of the throb (sphuraṇa) of the
Heart. This is the ceaseless repetition of Mantra which is the reflective awareness of

consciousness.
Abhinava has just finished explaining in the Mālinīvijayavārtika, that Sound

Reasoning (sattarka) as taught in Trika Śaivism leads to realization. He continues:


“Therefore, we will talk about the supreme means (to attain) that supreme
nonduality which graces all things, namely, the Heart which is the pulsation (of
consciousness) (spandana). (18cd)
The (reality) which, consisting of (awakened) consciousness (hodha), is within
the Heart, is (its own) reflective awareness of itself (svavimarśa). It is the wonder (of
the experience of the beauty of its) full (and all-embracing) consciousness. It is the
vibrant effulgence (sphuraṇa) (of the Light of consciousness) that has everywhere
merged (all things into itself) with great force, simultaneously and all at once.
Perfectly full of the contentment (nivṛti) that pours forth from the two states at

the beginning and the end of (each) perception of (any phenomenal) thing

(bhāvagraha), it is made of Cosmic Bliss, and said to be the universal vibration (of

consciousness) (sāmānyaspanda). (20) (cf. TĀ 4/182cd)

The radiant pulsation (sphuraṇa) of the Heart which is this manifest (prakaṭa)
universe manifests (pratibhāti) as the Being (S) of the Abode of Emission (H) to the

degree in which it penetrates here into the energy of Trika (AU). (The wise) explain that

this Heart (i.e. SAUH) is the supreme nectar of Bhairava consciousness. Present in the
prongs (of the Trika Trident), consisting of the powers of will, knowledge and action
(AU), it is emitted into Supreme Abode (S). (21-22)
(There,) this universe of the nature of consciousness has manifested (sphurita)
within the supreme (reality), which is the Lord’s supreme nature (bhagavatparātman)
(S), and is then present in the prongs (of the Trident of) the three powers (AU) by the
path of the emission of the Sāmbhava plane (H). Thuṣ, that is proclaimed to be Being


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


The Universal Pulse of the Heart of Consciousness

ā: īã sai: |] 2.2 1

parāmarśasvabhāvatvād etasyā yaḥ svayaṁ dhvaniḥ || 181 I|
sadoditaḥ sa evoktaḥ paramaṁ hṛdayaṁ mahat |
As (consciousness) is reflective awareness, its spontaneous and
perpetually emergent (sadodita) resonance (dhvani) (of pure self-awareness,
which is the supreme level of Speech,) is called the supreme, Great Heart

(SAUḤ). (181cd-182ab)

‘The resonance’ that arises spontaneously is Supreme Speech, which is
the Sound (nāda) that is the reflective awareness of (supreme) ‘’
(consciousness), in accord with the dictum:
“The god (deva), who resides in the chest of living (breathing) beings,
spontaneously utters (the Mantra) not uttered by anybody and that none

obstructs.

(sat) (S). That is here (according to the Trika teachings), this Heart which is full (all-

embracing) ‘I’ (consciousness) that shines perpetually as the radiant pulse (sphuraṇa) of

the union of Śiva and Śakti. (23-24)

Here the processes of emanation, persistence and withdrawal, generated

(saṅcita) by Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Hara as their causes, manifest a hundred times or

thousands of billions of times as the (one) eternal (reality).

The one who enters herein (readily) in a moment (sadyas) by way of the

aforementioned aggregate of means (yukti) is not one who is not empowered (and

capable to do so). It is for him that the (nature of the) pulsation of the Heart is elucidated

by the path of the Empowered Means. (26) MVV 2/18cd-26

This is the concluding verse of this section on the Heart, the realization of
which, in these terms, is indeed treated by Abhinava in the chapter of the TĀ dealing

with the Empowered Means. What follows concerns the Six Blisses. They are related to
the Heart and its pulsation as the culminating Cosmic Bliss of this series as the universal
pulsation of the Heart, but Abhinava places them in Chapter Five of the TĀ, dealing

with the Individual Means. The reason for this is that, as is the case with all the other
practices outlined in Chapter Five, the progressive development of states begins at the

Individual level, progressing through the sphere of the Empowered Means, in which

vikalpas are purified, to reach the sphere of the Divine Means of consciousness free of
all differentiation.

” See below, 4/186cd-189ab.

SYṬ 7/59. This verse is also quoted above, in the commentary on 3/66cd-67ab

and 3/147cd-148 (147-148ab), and again below in the commentary on 5/132cd-133ab
(5/131cd-132ab) and 8/388-394ab (387cd-393). See there for more details. The deity is
Haṁsa, as the original reading (haṁṣaḥ for devaḥ) in the SVT clearly confirms (see
above, note 3,166 ad 3/66cd-67ab (67), note 3,473 ad 3/147cd-148 (147-148ab) and
note 4,437). Haṁsa is the Unstruck Sound spontaneously made by the breath. It is the

microcosmic equivalent of the Unstruck Sound of the reflective awareness which is the

TANTRĀLOKA

It is ‘spontaneousʼ because it does not depend on anything else (apart

from the one universal reality of consciousness), and so because its nature is

eternal and unceasing, it is ‘perpetually emergent’; (in other words,) it is

(constantly) being uttered. All the scriptures refer to the (resonance of the

reflective awareness) of this supreme consciousness as the ‘supreme’ essence,

and as ‘Great’ (in the sense that) it pervades (all things) everywhere and at all

times, because it (never) wavers from it own nature. (It is also called the)
‘Heart’, which is the true nature (of all things) (tathyaṁ rūpam). Thus, as the

essential nature (of consciousness) is the reflective awareness of (supreme) ‘I’

(consciousness), which is (its) sovereign lordship (aiśvarya),” it manifests as

all things by virtue of its glorious power (māhātyma). As is said (in the

Īśvarapratyabhijñā):

‘(The power of) consciousness (citi) is reflective awareness. It is
Supreme Speech that arises spontaneously. That is the (supreme) primary
(mukhya) freedom and sovereignty of the Supreme Self. That is the radiant
effulgence (of the Light of consciousness as the manifestation of all things), the
great (universal) Being (of all that exists), unconditioned by time and space. As

the essence (of all things), that (Supreme Speech) is said to be the Heart of the

Supreme Lord.””

This reflective awareness of (supreme) ‘I’ (consciousness) is also

referred to in the scriptures, amongst other things, as ‘spanda’, not just the


Heart. Accordingly, he says:


ipaúkurE-t'eīḷ TTHI-JTT::

T-=. q hē̄ JĪ TJISHÇTFJGĨĨ̄Ĩ: || 2_3 1|
hṛdaye svavimarśo ‘sau drāvitāśeṣaviśvakaḥ || 182 ||
bhāvagrahādiparyantabhāvī sāmānyasaṁjñakaḥ |
spandaḥ sa kathyate śāstre svātmany ucchalanātmakaḥ || 183 I

vitality of consciousness, the breath of which is the cycle of the reflective awareness of
the supreme ‘ of the divine Light of Śiva consciousness.
” Although consciousness lights up whatever shines within it, it remains the same, one
undivided, unconditioned consciousness, and so pervades all things as their fundamental
inner nature.

” Supreme consciousness is the master of all things, because it creates and sustains
them as manifestations of its own Light within itself. This takes place because it reflects

upon itself and all things as ‘I am all this'. The reflective awareness, which is the

freedom of consciousness to be all things without compromising its oneness as all

things, is the same power by virtue of which consciousness is not just an absolute

priṅciple, it is Lord Śiva. Thus, it is also His sovereignty.

TP 1/5/13-14. 1/5/14 quoted ad 3/209cd-210, 5/139-140 (138-139) and 29/126cd127ab; ĪP 1/5/14cd is quoted ad 1/174cd-176ab.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

The self-awareness (svavimarśa) (from which) all things have flowed

forth (drāvita) (and dissolved away) within the Heart (of consciousness),

present in the beginning and end of perception (bhāvagraha), is called,
according

to

the

(Spanda)

teachings,

the

universal

vibration

of

consciousness (sāmānyaspanda), which is the outpouring (uccalana) (of

consciousness) within one’s own nature. (182cd-183)

The word ‘drāvita’ literally means ‘melted’, by which Jayaratha understands both
‘flowed forth’ and ‘fallen away’, which are also possible meanings of the word.
Accordingly, I have supplied both in the translation.

T have translated bhāvagraha as ‘perception’. The literal meaning is ‘the grasping of
existence (> phenomena). Perception takes places in three stages. At the beginning and
the end there is a pure awareness, free of thought constructs, of pure ‘I’ consciousness

which is its universal activity (sāmānyaspanda). In between, a determinate perception,

such as ‘this is blue’ develops, which is a thought construct.


Cf. MVV 2/18cd ff:


ata eva parādvaitaṁ yad viśvānugrahātmakam |I 18 II
tasyopāyaṁ paraṅ brūte hṛdayaṁ spandanātmakam |
hṛdaye bodhamayo yaḥ svavimarśaḥ pūrṇaciccamatkāraḥ |

yugapad drāg iti haṭhato līmīkrtaviśvataḥsphuraṇaḥ l 1 9 l
bhāvagrahādyacaramadaśādvayollāsinirvr̥tisupārṇaḥ |

jagadānandamayo ʻsau sāmānyaspanda ity uktaḥ l| 20 ||
sphuraṇaṁ hr̥dayasya yat kila prakaṭaṁ viśvam idaṁ viṣargadhāmnaḥ |
sad iti pratibhãti yãvatã trikaśaktau viśatĩha tāvatā || 21 ||
tad idaṁ hr̥dayaṁ nirucyate paramaṁ bhairavasaṅvidāmrtam |
iṣidṛkkṛtiśaktiśūlagaṁ parame dhāmni visr̥jyate tataḥ l| 22 |

parame bhagavatparātmani sphuritaṁ viśvam idaṁ cidātmakam |
śaktitrayaśūlagaṁ tataḥ śāmbhavabhūmivisargavartmanā || 23 ||
tad atho ʻsad iti pragīyate tad idaṁ pūrṇam ihāhamātmakam |

hṛdayaṁ śivaśaktisaṁgamasphuraṇātmaiva sadāvabhāsate || 24 1
iha sṛṣṭilayasthitikramāḥ śataśo vāpi sahasrakoṭiśaḥ |

pravibhānti ṣadātanātmaṇā haraviṣṇvambujahetusaṁcitāḥ || 25 |
iha tu puroktād yuktikalāpād yaḥ praviśet sadyo nāśaktaḥ |
taṁ prati śāktopāyapathena prakatīkriyate hṛdayaspandaḥ || 26 |

“Thus, I will now talk about the supreme means (upāya) to attain the supreme

nondual (reality) that graces all the universe, namely, the Heart, which is the pulsation

(spandana) (of consciousness). One’s own (inherent) reflective awareness, which is
awakened consciousness, is the wonder of full (unconditioned) consciousness within the

Heart. Suddenly and all at once with great force (hahataḥ) (its) radiant pulse
(sphuraṇa) is dissolved away in all respects (everywhere). (18cd-19)

The nondual outpouring at the beginning and end of perception, beautifully full

(and complete), made of Cosmic Bliss, is said to be the universal vibration of

consciousness (sāmānyaspanda). The radiant pulse of the Heart is clearly evident as this

universe that emerges from the abode of emission (visargadhāman) and shines as Being
untiḹ it enters here into the energy of Trika. That is said to be this Heart, the supreme
nectar of Bhairava’s consciousness. (20-22ab)

Then (the emission) present on the Trident of the energies of will, knowledge
and action is emitted into the Supreme Abode, that is, this universe, the nature of which

is consciousness. Present in the Trident of the three energies, it has flashed forth in the
Supreme, which is the Lord’s Supreme Self. That which is said to be Being is this

TANTRĀLOKA

In accord with the teaching that ‘(the word) ‘heart’ is a synonym of

consciousness (bodha),'™ the reflective awareness ‘within the Heart’ is within

the (awakened) consciousness which is one’s own nature. It has ‘flowed forth’
(drāvita), that is, extended out in an external form and also ‘dissolved away’, in
the sense that it has brought all things into a state of inner tranquillity. Thus, this

is its state of being (bhavanasīla) (in the beginning) ‘of perception’ʼ, that is,
when it is (just) beginning to assume the form of all things, and (consciousness)

intends to create (forms of perception and its contents) (nirmmitsāvasarē), ” and
at the ‘end’ when it intends to withdraw (them back into itself). Thus (reflective
awareness) is the (dynamic) state (of consciousness which is its perpetual)

outpouring (ucchalattā) as the expansion and contraction of its own nature.

Thus, in the Spandaśāstra and elsewhere, it is called the ‘vibration’ (of
consciousness), which should be said to be universal (not particular), as it does

not pour forth in (any) particular form, and also because it rests tranquil (within

itself). The meaning is that, in accord with its nature as the (dynamic) state (of
consciousness which is its perpetual) outpouring (ucchalattā), the nature of

which is subtle (non-temporal) motion (kiṁccicalana), it is termed ‘ spanda'

Surely, if that is so, then would not consciousness be constantly subject
to destruction, falling away, as it does, from its own essential nature due to (its)
subtle motion? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ffzrrōṁīāaarzaxrzTt
fē ã 1

kiñcic calanam etāvad ananyasphuraṇaṁ hi yat |
ūrmir eṣā vibodhābdher na saṁvid anayā vinā || 184 |
(This vibration is that) subtle motion (kirṁīciccalana) which is the
pulsing radiance (sphuraṇa) (of self-Ruminous consciousness that shines as

all things, independent of all else) which is not different (from itself). It is

Plenitude which is ‘’, the Heart, which is the radiant pulse of the union of Śiva and

Śakti, that shines perpetually. (22-24)

The processes of emanation, withdrawal and persistence, gathered together by
Hari, Viṣṇu and Brahmā, shine forth here a hundred or a thousand million times as the
eternal Self. He who enters (therein) by the manifold means taught (here) does so
immediately and is not powerless. It is for him that the vibration of the Heart is revealed
by the path of the Empowered Means. (25-26)

” Mrṛgendratantra (Vidyāpāda) 1/3/11c.

” Cf. MVV 1/185, where we find the same expression:
sthitaḥ sarvasphurattātmã sarvasiddhiphalodayaḥ |
evaṁ jagati nirmeye nirmitsāsvīkṛtaṁ balāt l|

‘Persistence is the radiant manifestation of all things. It is the dawning of the

fruits of all accomplishments. It is the intention to create (forms of perception and its

contents) that has been appropriated with force within the created universe.” MVV

1/185

Concerning spanda as subtle non-temporal motion, see Dyczkowski, 1987: 81.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


the wave (ūrmi) of the ocean of consciousness, and consciousness is (never)

without it.

That ‘subtle motion (kiṁciccalana) is the pulsing radiance (sphuraṇa),

which is the illumination of consciousness™ that (makes all things manifest as)

‘not different (from itself)’. (In other words,) it is independent of (all) else.
The meaning is that its light is not derived from something else, rather it is its
own (self-luminous) Light. This is the difference between (the Light of
consciousness) and insentient things, namely, that it shines by itself in this way
and

that

(tathā

tathā).

Thusṣ, just

(consciousness) is called ‘vibration’

as

this

reflective

awareness

of

(spanda) in the Spandaśāstra and

elsewhere, in the same way it is also called ‘wave’ (ūrmi) in the venerable

Ūrmikaula.” This is said (with the words), ‘it is the wave (āūrmi) of the ocean

Cf. above, 3/146ab-146cd (145cd-146ab).

7 Consciousness, from this perspective, has two aspects. One is its Light, which is

consciousness in itself. The other its ‘pulsing radiance’ (sphuraṇa) or ‘effulgence’
(sphurattā), which is the activity — spanda — of consciousness, that generates and is all
the countless phenomena that are illumined by its light, and shines as its phenomenal

manifestations. So just as they are not different from it, for the same reason this, the

radiance of the Light, is independent of all else. These two aspects of the one reality is

what is perceived by the direct perception (sākṣāt), free of thought constructs, that it has

of its own nature, at once as it is in itself and all its manifestations. When thought
constructs arise, individual entities are perceived by individual perceivers through their

own means of knowledge. This is the domain of duality, just as, conversely, the former
is that of nonduality.
The innate reflective awareness of consciousness centred in itself, as the
reflective awareness of supreme ‘I’ consciousness, first extends outwards and then is

brought to rest inwards. This process, which alternates between the expansion and
contraction of consciousness or self-awareness, is termed ‘Spanda’. It is consciousness
moving out into differentiated (vikalpa) awareness, thus creating a variegated,

differentiated universe of experience, and then withdrawing inwards and taking its rest

in undifferentiated (nirvikalpa) self-awareness. The formeris Śakti and the latter Śiva.
In reality, they are one, because Śakti has no support and Śivais not the support of
anything.

The expansion into a cosmos of objectivity (prameya) (which is really an

aspect of the means of knowledge), marks the contraction of self-awareness. This
movement from inner to outer occurs at every instant of perception. From the

undifferentiated awareness of something arises the perception “I perceive this”, and
again this returns into the undifferentiated state of pure self-awareness when the tension

of the need (ākaṁṅkṣa) to know has been relieved. This marks the contraction of outer

awareness and the expansion of the inner. This spontaneous alternation is termed
Spanda. The yogi who applies himself assiduously to the practice of cultivating and
maintaining awareness of this process experiences the expansion of consciousness in the
centre (madhyavikāsa) between these two phases. There, in the centre, he surveys the
entire process happening within himself as an expression of the exertion (udyama)

which is his innate freedom as the supreme subject, who is both the knower and agent of

this process. This vibration is the effulgence of awareness which, not illumined by
anything else, is self-luminous, and so differs from inert matter. Just as this Light is self-

luminous, it is also self-moving. External objects differ from it in this respect. It is self-

awareness, life itself.
√ Read ‘śrīmadūrmikaula ūrmitvenāpi’ for ‘śrīnadāūrmikīlāv ūrmitvenāpi’.

TANTRĀLOKA

of consciousnessʼ. Surely (one may ask,) why do all the scriptures hold this

view? With this doubt in mind, he says: ‘consciousness is (never) without it’.
(Indeed,) this itself is the very being of consciousness (saṁvidaḥ saṁvitvam),

namely, that it reflects on everything. Otherwise, (if this were not s0), when
(consciousness) is coloured by each particular entity, it would not differ from
(common) crystal and the like. As is said (in the śvarapratyabhījñā):
‘The (wise) know that the

(essential) nature of the light (of

manifestation) (avabhāsa) is reflective awareness; otherwise (if that were not

s0), the light (of consciousness), although coloured by the (entities manifest

within it), would be insentient, like a crystal.

In this way, although consciousness is (always) pure, it is said that its
radiance, coloured by each particular entity, is its primary form.
Surely (one may ask,) how is that reasonably possible? (Responding to)
this question, he gives an example:

fē fa-gar 1
niṣṭaraṅgataraṅgādivṛttir eva hi sindhutā |
Indeed, it is the nature of the sea to be (at times tranquil) without
waves and (at others) full of waves. (185ab)

He concludes:


TITHTTGTTKTK
JTRTTR STS STT I 2¢& I

zza eq |
sāram etat samastasya yac citsāraṁ jaḍaṁ jagat || 185 I|
tadadhīnapratiṣṭhatvāt tat sāraṁ hr̥dayaṁ mahat |
This (awareness) is the essence (sāra) of all things, as consciousness
is the essence of the lifeless (jada) universe, and the essence of that
(consciousness) is the Great Heart (of self-awareness), because its very

foundation (pratiṣṭhā) depends upon it. (I85cd-186ab)

‘This’ is the reality (vastu), characterised as reflective awareness, ‘of all
thingsʼ, that is, of the universe, sentient and insentient. It is ‘the essence’,
which is the like the soul (jīva) (of all things), as in accord with the saying, ‘the

(many) conditions (vyavasthiti) of the objects of sense are established in

consciousnessʼ, the foundation (pratiṣṭhāsthāna) of the insentient universe,
which consists of ‘form’ (and the other objects of the senses), is consciousness

alone; otherwise, if it were not, (nothing) could logically be an object of
perception. There is no dispute about this. And the great essence of that

1P 1/5/11. This verse is quoted in full above in TĀv ad 2/31cd-32ab (32), the first line
below ad 11/46-47, and the first quarter ad 16/249cd-251ab (250-251).


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


consciousness, the nature of which has been explained previously, is ‘the
Heartʼ alone, which because it is (intimately) associated with the wonder

aroused by its own nature, is the ‘great essence’, as the foundation
(pratiṣṭhāna) (of consciousness) within itself depends upon it. Otherwise, as we
have said many times (before), (devoid of reflective awareness, consciousness)

would be insentient.
He now explains this in relation another reality that needs be known
(prameya).

SAUḤ and KHPHREṀ
āa fē afēz #īāīṭ2 mraīvsatsrṁT
| 2¢F I

-BTTĪAĀT feT īaāi ārḡā |

TŪēGIThITdTTIÚRĪTsSTdTId ÑCTHI II Q¢A9 I

tathā hi ṣad idaṁ brahmamũlaṁ mãyãṇḍasaṁjñitam || 186 ||
icchājñānakriyārohaṁ vinā naiva ṣad ucyate |
tacchaktitritayārohād bhairavīye cidātmani || 187 ||
visr̥jyate hi tat tasmād bahir vātha visṛjyate |

In the same way, this (world, which is immanent) Being (sat) (S)
that is rooted in the (sphere of) Brahmā (brahmamūla), is called the ‘Egg

of Māyā’ (in the Mālinīvijayottara). It could not be said to be Being (sat)
without ascending (through the development of the powers of) will,

knowledge and action (AU). (This is) because it is due to the ascending
development of those three powers that it is emitted into Bhairava’s
conscious nature (and comes to rest within it). Or (if it is projected

Reflective awareness is the aesthetically arousing innate nature of consciousness. The

experience of consciousness is the experience of beauty, which is wonder.

These lines refer to the three letters of the seed-syllable of Parā, that is, SAUḤ. They
are noted in brackets.

The Upaniṣads similarly say that ‘this universe is rooted in the Brahman’
(brahmamūlam idaṁ jagat). The double meaning may well be intended.

7 Cf. MV 2/49:

pārthivaṁ prākrṛtaṁ caiva māyīyaṁ śāktam eva ca |
iti saṁkṣepataḥ proktam etad aṇḍacatuṣṭayam ||

‘It is said that this (sixfold Path is), in an abbreviated (form) (saṁkṣepataḥ), the
group of four Eggs. (These are the Eggs) of Earth, Nature, Māyā and Power.”

Also, MV 4/25: ‘The three Eggs (that extend up to the end of Māyā) are

pervaded by the letter S, and the fourth one by the Trident (AU), and that which is
beyond (them) all, by emission (H). (This) is considered to be the pervasion of Parā.”

Concerning the four Eggs, see note 6,371 ad 6/170cd-171ab (170).

TANTRĀLOKA

externally) it is emitted outside it (Ḥ) due to that (and from it).” (186cd188ab)

‘This’ (mundane reality is) ‘rooted in the (sphere of) Brahmā’, that is,
begins with the Egg of Brahmā. In other words, having included within itself the
Egg of Nature, it is called the Egg of Māyā, because it makes the universe of
Maāyā manifest, although it continues to be (pure, undifferentiated) Being. In

accord with the aforementioned reasoning (yukti), namely, that: ‘although an

entity has manifest, without (any) awareness of it, it is in fact unmanifest
because it does not rest within the (consciousness of the) perceiver,” as long

as (the reality of Being in the sphere of Māyā) has not ascended into the will,
knowledge and action of the power of reflective awareness, that is, the freedom
(of consciousness), (that emerge from it) like sprouts (from a seed) by the
progressive (intensification) of the desire to perceive etc., existence (tathātva) is

not firmly established, and so it cannot be said to be Being (i.e. real). The
meaning is that it does not attain the state of common daily experience
(vyavahāra) (of particulars, that are each known individually in such a way that

they can each be determined specifically as) ‘this is that’. This is so because

when Being, which is that universe (of manifestation), has developed within
reflective awareness, which consists of the three energies of will (knowledge
and action), it is ‘emitted into Bhairava’s’ nature, which is the supreme

subject, and comes to rest there. This is the process of withdrawal. Or else, by
the process of emanation, that universe ‘is emitted outside it’, that is, from that
(supreme perceiver), which is Bhairava’s nature. The meaning is that by

progressively descending the ladder of the three energies, from the principle of

The syllables SAUH and KHPHREM are analysed here in verses 4/186cd-191. They
are analysed again in the context of practice in the domain of the Individual Means
below in 5/54cd-79ab (78). In this case, there is no equivalent in the domain of the
Śāmbhava Means, as there is no question of any form of Mantra practice in this sphere

of consciousness, which is entirely free of discursive representation (vikalpa). See also
Padoux 1990: 416-426 and Sanderson 1990: 56-58.
” Concerning the four Eggs, see below, note 6,371 ad 6/170cd-171ab (170). The Egg

of Māyā contains only the principles (tattva) from Māyā to Puruṣa (the Individual Soul).
However, Jayaratha says that in this case, we should understand that it also includes the
Egg of Nature below it, which extends from the principle of Water up to Nature
(prakṛti). The first Egg is that of Earth, which includes only the principle of Earth.
Governed by Brahmā, it is also called the Egg of Brahmā. Jayaratha understands the
Egg of Brahmā in this case to be the Egg of Māyā which includes the Egg of Nature.
Jayaratha, it seems, implicitly includes the Egg of Brahmā in the specific sense, that is,

as just the Earth principle, in his broadened conception of it. Thus, the Egg of Māyā
includes all the principles from Earth up to Māyā, that is, the impure principles in which
duality prevails. Beyond them are the pure principles, representing degrees of oneness.

Clearly Jayaratha’s interpretation, although correct, is forced. It is more likely that

Abhinava’s reference to the Egg of Māyā is not to one of the four Eggs, as Jayaratha
takes it to be, but rather to ‘the sphere of Māyā’ in general, that is, the Impure Principles
from Earth to Māyā.

This reference in prose is not found in vimarśinī or vivṛtivimarśinī. It may be from
the vṛtti or the lost fTkā by Utpaladeva on his own ĪP.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Force (kalā) (which is highest level in the sphere of Māyā) down to Earth, it is

made manifest in a gross form.

In order to explain in this way that the emergence of the venerable seed
(Mantra) of the (Goddess) Parā (i.e. SAUH) is also not separate from the

sequence of consciousness (sarīvitkrama) (taught with reference to the Twelve

Kālīs), (these verses) refer to its emergence in both ways (in the sequence of
Ṭhe Being in the sphere of Māyā is the transitory, seemingly illusory existence of

phenomena. This is the illusory Being (sat) of those who, like the followers of Advaita

Vedānta, experience the world as Māyā, in the sense of an illusion. Indeed, if there were
to be no higher sphere in which the energies of consciousness, which is reality itself,
operate, it does indeed have the Being of an illusion which is not ultimate Being.

However, according to the Pratyabhijñā, which is the philosophy underpinning Anuttara

Trika, the world of daily life does exist. Its existence is derived from the powers of
consciousness to will, know and act, engaged in perception, through which the world of
perceptions is generated, and is the existence of individual things as ‘this’ or ‘that’.
Thusṣ, in the sphere of the Empowered Means, the utterance of SAUḤ is experienced as

the flux of consciousness, emanating and withdrawing all things.
Abhinava integrates the dynamism of consciousness expressed in the Trika teachings

by the phases of the utterance of SAUḤ, the seed-syllable Mantra (bīja) of the goddess
Parā, with that taught in the Krama system. He does this by explaining that although

expressed in different terms, the same phenomenology of perception underlies the

practice and experience of both. He has just explained how each of the Twelve Kālīṣ
represents a moment in the cycle of perception. This eternal, non-temporal ‘activity” is

the reflective awareness of the light of consciousness, which is its inherent energy,
identified with its freedom to be all things and yet remain one undivided reality. This
activity is inner worship, in the course of which two fundamental Mantras are uttered, as
it were, within consciousness. One is SAUH, which is the seed-syllable of the Trika.

The other is KHPHREM, which is the corresponding seed-syllable of the Krama, taught

next. The former is ‘uttered’ in the phase of emanation, and the latter in that of
withdrawal. To do this Abhinava resorts to another set of terms, which are drawn from
the Tantras, as is the Wheel of the Kālīs, and explains them in the same way in terms of
the phenomenology of perception, what is called here the ‘saṁvitkrama’ — ‘the process
which is consciousnessʼ.

The process of emanation begins with Being — sar — denoted by ‘S’, the first

letter of the syllable SAUH. ‘Beingʼ is understood here to be the Being of phenomenal

existence, which is the sphere of duality — the Egg of Māyā -- experienced as rooted in

the Being of Brahman, the Absolute. This is the point of departure. Emanation begins
when the universe — phenomenal Being — which is to be emitted has formed within the
Light of consciousness of absolute Being. Uttering the letter S, the practitioner reflects
on this initial phase. As the diphthong AU emerges in the course of the utterance of

SAUḤ, he contemplates how the undefined, inner manifestation of Being emerges into
the flow of the energies of the reflective awareness of the Light of consciousness that

has formed itself in this way. Passing inwardly through the three phases of its three

energies of will, knowledge and action, as the will to perceive, perception and the
completion of the act, inner Being comes to rest in Bhairava, the inner, supreme
perceiver. The inner cycle of perception thus complete, uttering the final H of emission

(visarga), it is emitted both externally and inwardly. ‘Uttered’ repeatedly in this way, as

the very pulse of the reflective awareness of consciousness, SAUḤ generates the
manifest universe inwardly, within universal Bhairava consciousness, and externally
within the sphere of individual consciousness, simultaneously. Conversely, by the
analogous utterance of KHPHREM, phenomenal Being, rooted in absolute Being thus

TANTRĀLOKA

emanation and withdrawal), by including (an implicit reference to the extent of
its) pervasion (of the principles of existence). This is as follows. (By saying
that) ‘Being (sar) is rooted in the Absolute (Brahman)ʼ, the letter S is
extracted, as is said in the scripture with this intended sense: ‘O fair hipped

one, (the letter S) is the third Brahman.’" By saying that ‘it is called the ‘Egg

of Māyā’, he indicates (the extent of its) pervasion (namely, the sphere of Māya
in which duality prevails). And that (like any other consonant) cannot be
pronounced without a vowel, and so, in accord with the teaching that: ‘the three
powers (of will, knowledge and action) are fully evident (and completely

manifest) in this, the abode of (AU), the fourteenth (vowel),’” the letter AU is

extracted with the (three powers of) will (knowledge and action). Moreover,

because it possesses the power of will (knowledge and action), he also indicates

that (the letter AU) pervades the Egg.™ By (saying) ‘it is emitted’, emission

(the letter H — visarga) is extracted, and by (saying) ‘into Bhairava’s conscious
natureʼ, (he indicates the extent of its) pervasion. As is said (in Mālinīvijaya):
‘The three Eggs (that extend up to the end of Māyā) are pervaded by the
letter S, and the fourth one by the Trident (AU), and that which is beyond all by
emission (H). (This) is considered to be the pervasion of Parā.’

He concludes this (topic saying):


T JgJÑaT] āīāī JĪTFTTATHTĀ

ftrat vŪaḷ a-Ṁr̥
ad

emitted externally, is withdrawn inwardly from the outer sphere of individual
consciousness, to emit it within the inner sphere of universal Bhairava consciousness.

Mantras are formed by ‘extracting’ their letters from a diagram (technically called

‘prastāra’), which is divided into fifty compartments, each one of which contains one of

the letters of the alphabet. Concerning these diagrams, uses and varieties, see

Dyczkowski 2009: note 1 of chapter 8 of the translation. The outer diagram represents

the matrix of energies held within consciousness, represented by the letters. The
‘extraction’ of the letters is thus the process of the emergence of the energies one by one

to form the configurations through which consciousness operates through Mantras.

PT 10a. The third Brahman is Śiva, the third member of the Trika triad of Man,

Power and Śiva. See above, note to TĀv ad 3/169ab (168ab).
Above 3/104cd . Abhinava is paraphrasing MV 4/25cd.

The powers of consciousness to will, know and act are ‘fully evident’ in the sphere of
Maāyā, in which individual perceivers, set in relation to their objects, will, know and act.
Operant everywhere and in all circumstances within the sphere of Maāyā, i.e. duality,

they pervade it.
MV 4/25. The first quarter is quoted above in TĀv ad 3/166 (165cd-166ab), the
second quarter is quoted ad 3/104cd-105ab. The entire verse is quoted ad 11/89 and,

along with the preceding verse, ad 16/221-222 (221cd-223ab). See note to TĀv ad
3/104ab-105cd. In the preceding verses (i.e. 19 to 23ab), the MV teaches how the
syllables of the Vidyā of the goddess Parāparā pervade the metaphysical principles, and

those of the Vidyā Aparā pervade the four Eggs (verse 24). This verse states how the
letters of Parā’s Vidyā — SAUḤ — pervade the four Eggs and the transcendent beyond.
Concerning the four Eggs, see note 6,371 ad 6/170cd-171ab (170).


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


evaṁ sadrūpataivaiṣāṁ satāṁ śaktitrayātmatām || 188 II
visargaṁ parabodhena samākṣipyaiva vartate |

It is the Being (S) of (all) these existing things (i.e. the three Eggs),

(and so) is the three powers (AU); embracing (them) and emission (H)
(within itself) as supreme consciousness, it abides (dynamically) (vartate) in

this way. (188cd-189ab)

‘(It is) the Being of (all) these existing things’,' that is, the Egg of

Brahma and the rest (of the Eggs) that manifest as the nature of all things, ‘(and

s0) is the three powers; embracing (them) and emission (within itself) as

supreme consciousness, it abides (dynamically) (vartate) in this way’. The
meaning is that by the progressive development of emission (in the manner
described), (Being) shines radiantly, at one with the supreme subject. By
referring in this way to the letter S, which includes the letter AU and emission
(H), as the main one, he indicates that even though the venerable seed-syllable
of Parā does arise in the accord with the sequence of withdrawal, emanation
predominates. As he will say: . . the preceding one (SAUḤ) is considered to

be the ‘Heart of Emanation”°.

” Saṇḍerson (1990 p. 37) translates: ‘Thus the fact that these (Spheres of Brahmā,

prakṛtiḥ and māyā) are real (s-) entails that they are identical with those three powers
(au) and that they are the projection (h) (of the ultimate consciousness) and are of the

essence of that consciousness.’

ṀB Cf. above 3/166 (165cd-166ab) and above note 3,526.

The process of emission of consciousness into manifest form is concomitant with that
of its manifestation at one with it. Withdrawal of manifestation into consciousness,

whereby it is made and recognised to be one with it, is the foundation of emission,
because without that oneness, what is emitted could not exist. Emanation is thus
grounded in withdrawal and vice versa. The distinction between the two phases of this
‘processless processʼ is just a matter of predominance of one or the other. In this way,

SAUḤ, the seed-syllable of Parā, the supreme goddess of the Trika, is that of emanation

(sṛṣṭibīja), whereas Piṇḍanātha (KHPHREṀ), the seed-syllable of Kālī Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī,

the supreme goddess of the Krama, which Abhinavagupta expounds next, is that of
withdrawal (saṁhārabīja). Abhinava beautifully integrates in this way the two Tantric

schools of his Anuttara Trika. Kālī consciousness taught in the Krama consumes duality.

Parā consciousness taught in Trika emits oneness. Thus, they are both on the same

supreme level.

S Below, 4/191d. Sanderson (ibid. p. 57-58): . . . Jayaratha points out that in this

passage Abhinavagupta is reading SAUḤ from both perspectives: both from that of
reabsorption (saṁhārakramaḥ) and from that of emission (srstikramaḥ). Abhinavagupta

gives two meanings to the projection of the -h element of the seed-syllable, so that

SAUḤ is made to express both (i) (the awareness of) the projection of the universe into
consciousness, the fact that it comes to rest (viśrāntiḥ) through resorption, within the
nonduality of the transcendental subject (parapramātā, akalpitapramātā), and (ī) (the
awareness of) its projection out of that nonduality, its emission into consciousness from

within. Nonetheless, Jayaratha explains, Abhinavagupta intends the mode of emission to

be understood as the basic sense of the syllable. For the Tantrāloka speaks of SAUḤ as
the ‘heart in emission’ (sṛṣṭau hṛt [sṛṣṭiḥṛdayam]), contrasting it with KHPHREM, the
‘heart in resorption’ (sarṅhārahr̥dayam).

TANTRĀLOKA

Having defined the arising of the venerable seed-syllable of Parā in this

way in accord with the sequence of consciousness (saṁvitkrama), he (goes on)

to explain the arising of the venerable Piṇḍanātha, intending thereby to say that
it is on the same level (and of equal importance).
SISŚEĒI Ṭaī% ÉḷtGIEIĪEĪṬATE I| 2¢ 1

ÉṭEGREANNUĪVGĪEDIRETCZ-Ḥ

GTHRTÑJ ūṬṬT̄ JIĪTFTTTTTĪTRRTq I 23 1

tat sad eva bahīrūpaṁ prāg bodhāgnivilāpitam || 189 1|
antar nadat parāmarśaśeṣībhūtaṁ tato ‘py alam |
khātmatvam eva saṁprāptaṁ śaktitritayagocarāt || 190 ||
vedanātmakatām etya saṁhārātmani līyate |

Initially, that Being is external, and is consumed by the fire of

consciousness (R), until all that remains is a residue of inner resonant

awareness (PH). Then it becomes the Sky (of consciousness KH)
completely, and so, by the field (gocara) of the three powers (of will,

knowledge and action) (E), it becomes the awareness (vedana) (M) (which is
the power of the freedom of consciousness to act as the agent of perception)
to (then finally) dissolve away into the essential nature of withdrawal
(saṁīhāra) (of phenomenal manifestation). (189cd-191ab)

‘That’ universe manifests and hence exists ‘initially’ in an external
form, because it would not be possible for it to manifest otherwise.

‘Consciousness’ (in this case) is the contracted manifestation which is the
means of knowledge, and that is Fire (R). It consumes the Being (of the

universe) by reducing the outer form to ashes so that it attains the state of
ultimate reality (paramārtha), which is nothing but one’s own nature.
Resonating inwardly in a state of oneness with the subject, pouring forth by the

removal (tiraskāra) of the awareness of objectivity (idāntāparāmarśa), it is

the ‘awareness’ (of supreme) ‘I’ consciousness (PH). That (is all that remains)
apart from one’s own essential nature as the ‘residue’, although that (too) has

become one with it. Subsequently, it becomes ‘completely’ and totally so
(atyartham), because the latent trace of duality, consisting of the means and

object of knowledge etc., also attains the state of emptiness. Then, when ‘it

becomes the Sky (of consciousness KH)’, and shines radiantly as just the

Light, which is the supreme subject, ‘it becomes the awareness (vedana) (Ṁ)’,

” Notice that in the case of SAUḤ, the seed of emanation, ‘that Being’ is initially

internal and is then emitted externally. Now the process begins when ‘that Beingʼ is
initially external and is then withdrawn internally.

1 translate ‘tiraskāra’ as ‘removal’, but more literally it means ‘setting aside’ or
‘concealingʼ.

Read san for sat.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


which is the power of the freedom of consciousness to act as the agent of the act
of perception, by rising step by step along the ladder of the three energies,
beginning with that of action (then knowledge and will) (E). Then (once that

state has been attained, they) ‘dissolve away into the essential nature of

withdrawal (saṅhāra) (of phenomenal manifestation)’ (Ṁ). The meaning

is that it shines radiantly as one within the abode of the venerable
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, Whose nature is described (in the following verse):

‘May the power of the God of the gods, Whose nature is Śiva and is
(one and) undivided, withdraw even the withdrawal of the withdrawal of the

withdrawal of everything (into Her own nature).””

The pervasion of the venerable Piṇḍanātha is (described) here in accord

with the sequence of consciousness (sarṁvitkrama), and so it has been extracted
(letter by letter) in accord with that. Again, it is called ‘the fire of
The process of withdrawal, which takes place by the ‘utterance’ of this seed-syllable,

begins from the phenomenal Being of the outer world of Māyā. This is at first ‘burnt

away and reduced to ashes’ by recognizing the ‘means of knowledge’, that is to say, the

activity of the senses. Pouring out of the perceiving subjectivity, they transform, as it

were, the outer object into sensations, which are recognised to be extensions of the

universal activity of consciousness. The ‘outer form° thus recognised to be nothing but a

form of consciousness, its true ultimate nature is recognised to be the perceiver. This
first phase takes place through the fiery energy of the ‘contracted’ consciousness of the
senses, experienced when uttering ‘R’, the first letter. Objectivity thus set aside, the

conditioned subjectivity of the perceiver at the dualistic level of Māyā, expands

spontaneously, resonant with the reflective awareness of unconditioned consciousness,
the supreme perceiver. The fire of
R leaves behind the ‘ashes’ of objectivity, that is, its
latent trace. This expansion, experienced when uttering ‘PH’, the second letter,
consumes them also, transforming them into the void of pure consciousness that unfolds
when uttering the letter KH, shining as the Void of the Sky of the infinite Light of the
supreme perceiver. The letter E that follows is the Womb (yoni) or matrix of energies

which, of three main types, are progressively withdraw from that of action, into
knowledge and that into the will. Thus, step by step reversing the outward outpouring of
the externally directed energies of consciousness, they are withdrawn into the Goddess
of Consciousness, Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, when the final Point (M) is uttered. See below, note
4.754.

”: From the perspective of Trika phenomenology, the first ‘withdrawal of all things’ is
the recognition that as outer objectivity, they are forms of perception. The ‘withdrawal’
of this withdrawal is the recognition that perception is essentially one with the

individual perceiver. The third withdrawal is the recognition that the individual
perceiver is one with the universal perceiver, which is universal consciousness. This too
is finally and definitively withdrawn in the inscrutable recognition of the pure Light of
consciousness which is Anuttara, the Inexplicable. Swami Lakshmanjoo would say that

Kaālī consciousness, Śiva’s power, which withdraws all things into itself and makes them

one with it, is ‘the end of all endingsʼ.

RPHKHEM is the sequential order of the letters of the seed-syllable of
Mātṛṣadbhāva or Kālakarṣiṇī, also called Piṇḍanātha or Pañcapiṇḍanātha from the point
of view of the succession of consciousness (sarṁvitkrama), whereas its phonemic
succession is KHPHREMṀ (see below, 30/45cd-46 and, with variants, MV 8/39-43).

Concerning these two seed-syllables, see Padoux, 1990, pp. 416-426.

TANTRĀLOKA

consciousnessʼ, because it burns the fuel which is all things. (This means that)

the seed-syllable of Fire (R), which is contracted consciousness, the nature of

which is the means of knowledge, dissolves into the Māyā perceiver. (Once

that has happened), the ‘resonance’ (nāda) etc. (of the following phase,
represented) by the Cruel Letter (krūravarṇa) (PH), which is the Kuṇḍalinī of

Withdrawal, and its graphic representation (lipi) is of that form,’ dissolves'

into the supreme subject, and so (in this phase) the Māyā subjectivity also
(ceases), and its cessation (abhāva) is (its state as) ‘the Sky (of

consciousness). (He refers in this way to) the letter KH, which is the Sky (of

consciousness), and the supreme subject, who possesses (the three) energies of
will (knowledge and action) as its true nature. (By referring to) ‘the three
powersʼ (he suggests the letter E. It is) the seed-syllable of the matrix
(yonibīja), which is the conglomeration (piṇḍībhāva) of the energies of will
(knowledge and action) within the power of the freedom (of consciousness).

(By saying that) ‘it becomes awareness’ʼ, he (indicates) the extraction of the
bindu (i.e. M at the end). In this way, those who know the scriptures explain that
this is the venerable Pañcapiṇḍanātha in the form of the five letters, beginning

with R and ending with bindu (ie. RPHKHEṀ). Elsewhere, the dawning (of
Piṇḍanātha) is explained in another manner (from a different point of view)

(bhaṅgyantareṇa).

Read agnibījena for agnibījasya.
Read ityadi for tyādi.
Read krūravarṇasya for kūṭavarṇasya. Sanderson (2006b: 114 n. 397) disagrees with

Padoux (1990, p. 424, n. 117), who interprets the form of this syllable as RKSKHEM,
which does not exist. It is in fact, RPHKHEM, the reverse of KHPHREṀ (see below).
He proposes emending kūṭavarṇasya (= KS) to kuṇḍalavarṇasya or krūravarṇasya, both
code names for the letter PH. He notes that Abhinavagupta himself probably had
another of these code-names for PH in mind, namely, ravaḥ ʻthe resonance’ or rāviṉī

‘the resonator’ʼ, to which he seems to refer as ‘inner resonant awareness’.

The shape of the written form of PH, the ‘Cruel Letter’, resembles the shape of
Kuṇḍalinī rising, represented by the bent lines to the sides merging into the straight line

in between, engaged in the progressive withdrawal of outer manifestation into

consciousness, as it ascends step by step.

Read layāc ca for ca.

7“ The letter E is represented by a downward facing triangle. It is the seed of the Yoni,
and consists of the three energies of will, knowledge and action held together in the

oneness of the energy of the freedom of consciousness (see above, 3/94ab-94cd (94cd95ab)). Notice that the letter AU of the seed-syllable of Parā also contains these three

primary energies, but they are in the forward order of emanation — will, knowledge and
action — whereas here in the letter E, they are in the reverse order of withdrawal.
This is the order of withdrawal, that is, the one which corresponds to the process
within consciousness. In his commentary on the next line, Jayaratha quotes the
Kramastotra as an authority that attests that the seed-syllable KHPHREM is meant in
the reverse order.

Jayaratha tells us that the verse he quotes in the commentary of the next line of the

Tantrāloka is drawn from ‘the venerable hymn’ (śrīstotrabhaṭṭāraka). This can only be
the Kramastotra. It is probable that these two verses, which are set in the same metre as
the Kramastotra, are also drawn from there. Thus, he is furnishing support from this
prime authority to justify Abhinava’s exposition of the syllable KHPHREM as the
dynamism of consciousness when it is engaged in withdrawing the outer phenomena it


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

‘The Yogi whose senses have fallen away in the Sky of Śiva

(consciousness) (KH), bliss expanded (within him) by the unfolding of
Kuṇḍalinī (PH), all the cavities (of his senses) burning (with consciousness) (R),
having ascended into the cave of a (beautiful) passionate woman’s (kāminī)
heart (E), (rests) as though in the void (Ṁ), his Heart of the Yoginī
(KHPHREṀ), rises up (recited) spontaneously in the sphere (maṇḍala) of the

Sky of the Heart (M), shining brilliantly (like) countless millions of fires.’”

He concludes this (teaching saying):


S I 82 |

This

(KHPHR̥EṀ)

idaṁ saṁhãrahr̥dayaṁ prãcyaṁ sr̥ṣṭau ca hr̥ṇ matam || 191 I|
(seed-syllable)

is

(called)

the

‘Heart

of

Withdrawal’ʼ, while the preceding one (SAUḤ) is considered to be the
‘Heart of Emanation’. (191cd)

‘This’ is the reflective awareness of the venerable Piṇḍanātha. Although
like the venerable seed-syllable of Parā, it does (also) arise in the sequence of
emanation (sṛṣṭikrama), but because it withdraws duality (into undivided
consciousness) of the letters (of the syllable) beginning with R, it is called the
‘Heart of Withdrawal’, as it is that which predominates. Thus, its arising is
described in the venerable hymn (the Kramastotra) also as taking place by the

process of withdrawal (in the following verse):

‘By the process of merger brought about by the power that consumes

the universe, one should contemplate (cintya) the fierce Wheel, which is the
Great Withdrawal (of the contents of cognition into consciousness) (i.e.
KHPHREṀ), from the Fire of Time (R) up to the end of the energy of the Void

(E), and has reached and is established in this way on the plane of the Sky of

(unconditioned, transcendental) Consciousness (M).’

‘The preceding one’ is (SAUḤ), the seed-syllable of Parā (the
Supreme Goddess) of (all) living beings (jīvaparābīja). Although that arises
through the process of withdrawal also, it nourishes all things. Thus, because it
is predominantly the seed-syllable of Nectar (amṛtabīja), the nature of which is

emanation, it is called ‘the Heart of Emanation’,'™ in accord with the teaching
imparted previously:

has emitted back into itself, thus mirroring the dynamism of the cycle of the Twelve

” This verse cryptically refers to the usual order of the letters of this syllable, namely,

KHPHREM, as it describes the expansion of consciousness (unmīlana) after the
attainment of the Stainless (nirañjana).
7 This is a description of the activation of the seed-syllable KHPHREM in the manner

of its arising within consciousness, that is, in the reverse order, which we have seen is

RPHKHEṀ.

” Often, if not usually, a Mantra or Vidyā begins with its seed-syllable. However, in

the unusual case of Parā, Her Vidyā is just SAUḤ, which is also its seed-syllable.
Moreover, as Jayaratha points out, although it also arises within consciousness ‘in the

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Thus, the universe manifests clearly within this letter S.” (The wise)

call it the yogi’s ‘Abode of Supreme Nectar”.

He teaches the same in another context:


‘I’ Consciousness is the Vitality (vīrya) and Heart of all Mantras

TTJIĪIHYTJTITITĪTHGT |

SṬTrṝcāīgītrā JTTS JTĒTJTT I -32 |I

etadrūpaparāmarśam akṛtrimam anāvilam |
aham ity āhur eṣaiva prakāśasya prakāśatā || 192 ||
etad vīryaṁ hi sarveṣāṁ mantrāṇāṁ hṛdayātmakam |
vinānena jaḍās te syur jīvā iva vinā hṛdā || 193 II
They say that the reflective awareness, uncreated and unsullied,

which is this reality, is (supreme) ‘I’ (aham) (consciousness). This, indeed, is

the luminosity of the Light (of consciousness). This is the vitality (vīrya) and
heart of all Mantras; without it, they would be insentient, like living beings

without a heart.”" (192-193)

‘This reality,’ taught previously, ‘which is reflective awareness,’
arises as the process of emanation and the rest with the venerable seed-syllable

of Parā etc. as its field (of operation). It is ‘uncreated’ because it arises

spontaneously (by its own innate aesthetic delight) (svarasodita). Thuṣ, it is
‘unsullied’, because it is not sullied by the dirt which is the reflective awareness

of objectivity (idantā), which is its opposite. They say it is ‘I’ (aham)

(consciousness)ʼ. The meaning is that they say that it is the reflective awareness

of (supreme) ‘I’ (consciousness). The point is that the reflective awareness of ‘I’

(consciousness) (aharī) arises (both) in the sequence of emanation beginning

with A (anuttara) and ending with H (as AHAṀ), and so too in the sequence of

withdrawal ending with A (as MAHA).”” As was said before:

order of withdrawalʼ, it is not reversed (to HAUS) as happens with KHPHREM, the
seed of withdrawal. SAUḤ is the seed of emanation, and so does not reverse within

consciousness even in the process of withdrawal, because it is ‘nourishingʼ, i.e.
emanating inwardly, within transcendental consciousness, just as it does externally
within immanent consciousness.

“ Concerning the Vidyā of Parā — SAUḤ, which begins with the letter S. See below,
30/27-28ab.

Above, 3/166 (165cd-166ab).

71 Cf. above, 3/223ab and commentary.
! Abhinava describes this process in the PTv p. 85-86. See Dyczkowski 1987a: 185188 for a detailed exposition, including a diagram of this cyclic pulse of AHAM.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


‘The flow (of emanation) (prasṛti) that begins with the Absolute (A)
and ends with H is (the Lord’s) power (śakti), which, once it has encompassed
the entire universe (and withdrawn it back into itself), merges into the

Absolute.

(He is) saying in this way that the venerable seed-syllable of Parā and

Piṇḍanātha are on an equal level (kakṣya).” (One may ask,) ultimate reality

(paramārtha) is the radiant manifestation (parisphuraṇa) of supreme
consciousness as the emergence and merger of the wonderful variety of all the
endless number of things, and that (reality) is common to (all) of them, so what

cause could there be for them to be on different levels (kakṣya)? Surely (one

may ask,) how can consciousness manifest in the form of each individual

(thing)? With this question in mind, he says: ‘this, indeed, is the luminosity of

the Light (of consciousness)”.™ Otherwise (devoid of this luminosity which

shines as all things), this supreme Light would not be different from a
(common) jar. As was said before:
‘If the Great Lord were to have a body of (but) one (fixed) form, he

would have to give up His lordship and nature as consciousness and be

(insentient), like a (common) jar.”

Surely (one may ask,) he is discussing the vitality of Mantras, so why
does he say that the essential nature of supreme consciousness is undivided?
With this question in mind, he says that: ‘this (is the vitality (vīrya) and heart

of all Mantras). ‘This’ is the principle of consciousness, pervaded by the
reflective awareness of ‘’. The point is that (this is the nature) ‘of all

(Mantras), not just that of the venerable seed-syllable Parā and Piṇḍanātha.

‘Without’”” the vitality which is the reflective awareness of ‘’

(consciousness), (Mantras) would be ‘insentient’. The meaning is that because
(such Mantras) are devoid of the effulgence (sphurattā) (of the light of

consciousness), they are useless (aprayojaka).™ As was said (previously):
” Above, 3/204cd-205ab.

” This implies that the Goddesses of the Trika and Krama systems, of which these are
the seed-syllables, are both equally supreme.

7 The question here is that if you say that consciousness manifests as all things and that

that is ultimate reality, why refer to it as reflective awareness and ‘’ consciousness?

What is the purpose of positing these various categories? Abhinava replies that we are
actually talking about the same reality in different perspectives. When talking about

consciousness in itself, it is referred to as the Light. When we talk about it as

manifesting as all things, we refer to it as the luminosity which illumines them, by virtue
of which they are manifest, and as such exist. The ‘luminosity” of the light is its power —
Śakti — to illumine etc., identified with its reflective awareness, the content of which is ‘I
amʼ. This perpetually self-renewing and self-absorbing awareness is represented by the
dynamism of the phases of the inner ‘utterance’ of the two seed-syllables.

7 Above, 3/100cd-101ab.
71 Read akaṇḍam for akaṇḍa.

”” Read vināneneti for aneneti.
”" The Siádhayogeśvarīmata is not only the first and root Tantra of the Trika, it is also
one of the oldest Bhairava Tantras. The recension that has come down to us begins with

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Mantras devoid of the first (letter) (A) and the last (H) would indeed be

(barren) like autumn clouds.”””

Now he says that not only are Mantras vital (and effective) because of

this vitality, other things are also.

The True Repetition of Mantra etc. (iapyādivāstavam)

akṛtrimaitad dhr̥dayārūḍho yat kiñcid ācaret |
prāṇyād vā mṛśate vāpi sa sarvo ‘sṣya japo mataḥ l| 194 ||

”"Whatever one who is established in this uncreated Heart does or

(however) he breathes or reflects, is all considered to be his repetition of

Mantra (japa).

an important question: why are Mantras ineffective? The answer given there reveals a
fundamental feature of Tantric Mantras, namely that they are effective if they possess
the vitality (vīrya) of the energy of the letters of the sacred alphabet (mātrkā). Only
Mantras that have been formed by the prescribed ritual procedure from the letters
extracted from a sacred grid (prastāra) in which they are deposited, are effective.

Higher Trika exegesis understands these letters, as we have seen in Chapter Three, as
energies of the reflective awareness of ‘I' (ahaṁ) consciousness. The power Mantras

possess is not a material, physical energy, like electricity. It is essentially the power of
the reflective awareness of the consciousness of the person who repeats them. Mantras

should be repeated maintaining a focused awareness of oneself as essentially
consciousness. That reflective awareness is the effulgent radiance of the Mantra’s
vitality and power. It is this which makes the Light of Śiva consciousness what it is.
Devoid of that, Śiva’s Light would be insentient, incapable of doing or knowing
anything. Just as individual, contracted consciousness has some power to act and know
because some of the radiance of its Light continues to shine, similarly mantras that
participate in the radiant reflective awareness of the one who recites them are functional.

71 Above, 3/223ab.

” In 4/180cd-181ab, Abhinava introduced the topic of the interiorization of ritual. This
was followed by a digression from 181cd-182ab to discuss the vitality of Mantra, and

how that is represented by the flow of the power of consciousness through the seed-

syllables of emanation and withdrawal. From 194, he continues to examine the
interiorization of the elements of ritual, namely, japa (194), dhyāna (195-199), mudrā
(200), and oblation (201-202). The Tantras and their exegetes repeatedly teach such

interiorizations of ritual. But even so, we rarely find the identifications they make with
inner processes or states to be the same, although they may, of course, be similar. It is
instructive and interesting to compare here what two other related sources say. One is a

passage that comes towards the end of the Śivadṛṣṭi by Somānanda, the teacher of
Utpaladeva of the Pratyabhijñā school. The other is the Vijñānabhairava. See above
note 4,359 to TĀ 4/122cd-123ab for a full translation of ŚDṛ 7/78-106, where the

interior equivalents of worship are described, presented along with passages from the
Vijñānabhairava.

”" MVV 2/127-130ab outlines the repetition of Mantra as follows:


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

Whatever outer activity that is proper (and should be done) the yogi

who rests in the reflective awareness of uncreated

(consciousness),

penetrated by it, undertakes, ‘all is his repetition of Mantra’. The meaning is

that, as everything for him is the constant recurrence (āvartana) of the reflective

awareness of his own nature as the deity, (it all) shines radiantly as Mantra. As

(he) said (previously):

‘In this way, wherever (the yogi) abides by virtue of the nature of his own

reflective awareness, there the penetration into the three energies (of will, knowledge

and action takes place), and (so) to that degree manifests three-fold (127) and shines
nine-fold (as each power is also of the nature of the others). (Then, having multiplied)
the aforementioned wheel of twelve (by nine), the repose (attained) in a moment is the

state of one hundred and eight. (Thus) that state is perceived to be one as well as

hundreds. In this way, whatever this yogi may say, it becomes fit for repetition (as
Mantra) on the path of the absolute (anuttara).”
referring to TĀ 26/64 = MVV 2/126. read bhāsamānaś ceti for

bhāsamānasya read japayogyāya for japayogāya.

Ṁ See above, 3/219cd-225ab. Abhinava discusses the nature of mantra in the context of
all three means to realisation. In the sphere of practice of the Divine Means
(śāṃmbhavopāya), there is no reference to any specific Mantra. Practice at that level is
beyond articulated words and thought constructs ~ including those associated with
Mantras. Penetrated by the pure reflective awareness free of objectivity of the supreme
subjectivity of Bhairava consciousness, every word becomes a Mantra, that is, a

powerful invocation and praise of that consciousness. Mantras are also not recited
externally in the Empowered Means. It is replaced by the exercise of reflective

awareness, which is the vitality of mantras, through which the yogi purifies his
awareness from objectivity. As he progresses, his words and thought constructs are
absorbed into this reflective awareness, which ultimately shines with the same
spontaneity and brilliance as it does on the level of the Divine Means free of thought

constructs.
Reflective awareness as the power of consciousness, identified as the Light, is

a core concept of Pratyabhijñā ontology and epistemology. Not fully developed as a

concept prior to Utpaladeva, we find a variety of concepts that prefigure it, especially

soteriological ones. An example is the practice of ‘contemplation’ ~ bhāvanā — as we
find it in the VBh (v. 145), where it is also presented as a higher manner of repeating
mantras: ‘repeated (continuous) contemplation (bhāvanā) of the supreme state is the
(real) repetition of Mantra (japa) here (in this tradition). The Sound (nāda) which
(resounds spontaneously) by itself is Mantra (in the highest sense). Such is that which is

to be recited.”

The Śivadṛṣṭi gets closer to the identification of the repeated recitation of
Mantra as reflective awareness: “l am Śiva”, and so all things take place in accord with

my own will. Thus, this Yoga (is constantly present in my) the mind, namely that ‘Siva
is everythingʼ, (and everything) is always strung together by the continuous flow of my

power. Uninterrupted repetition of Mantra (japa) is that repetition that (persists) in all

states, doing it constantly in many forms and arising present in all things. The supreme
(form of) the repetition of Mantra (is attained) by the practice ‘I am here and so is Heʼ.
‘I abide (here) generating intentions and thus (also) words in (my) mouth.’ That should
be known to be the repetition of (Śiva’s) name, and as truth (sarya) etc. it is of three
kinds, namely (the notion that) ‘I am not bound’ʼ, ‘I am not liberated’ʼ, and ‘those two
(bondage and liberation) are the Impurities (of ignorance that sullies the soul). ŚDṛ
7/83cd-87. See above note 4,359 to TĀ 4/122cd-123ab for a full translation of ŚDr 7/78106.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Therefore, knowing whatever verse or prose (he utters), united with the

first and last (letter) in this way, he sees everything as Mantra.’”

Thus it is said elsewhere (namely, in the Śivasūtra,) that ʻcommon talk

is (his) repetition of Mantra.’ It is said with the same intended sense by those
who are outside (our tradition) also that: ‘(even just) chatter (for such a one) is

the repetition of Mantra.’ After (having taught the nature of the) vitality of
Mantra, he has in this way taken up the subject of (the nature) of the true

repetition of Mantra and the rest, as announced in the (initial) enunciation (of

the topics of the Tantrāloka). Having in this way expounded there (in that
context) the true nature of the repetition of Mantra, he now goes on to say (the
following), in order to define the true nature of visualization (dhyāna) and the
rest, which is included in the words ‘and the rest’:
Supreme Dhyāna

3qxa rvzaī gftzāalraaīāōtēā|

] 224 1
yad eva svecchayā sṛṣṭiṣvābhāvyād bahirantarā |
nirmīyate tad evāsya dhyānaṁ syāt pāramārthikam || 195 |I
Visualization (dhyāna) in the highest sense (pāramārthika) is
whatever (the yogi) fashions externally and internally by his own (free) will
out of his own (true conscious) nature, (which is endowed with the power)

of emanation (sṛsṭi).”

Ṁ Above, 3/225. Also quoted ad 16/275abc.

ŚSū 3/28 (327 of Kṣemarāja’s recension). See Dyczkowski 1987b: 142-143.
T have not been able to trace this reference. Perhaps Jayaratha is drawing here from a
Buddhist text.
7 Verṣes 195-200 correspond to MVV 2/134-140.

yad eva svecchatayā sṛṣṭiṣvābhāvyavaśataḥ puraḥ |
nirṇimīte ʻkṣaviṣayaṁ taddhyānāyāvakalpate |/ MVV 2/134, which is equivalent to TĀ
4/195:
‘Whatever object of sense (the yogi) fashions before (him) by his own (free)
will through the influence of (the universal consciousness which is) his own nature
(endowed with the power) of emanation (srsti), is conceived in order for that to be an
(an object of) visualization.’
The preliminary rites of a pūjā include the visualization (dhyāna) of the deity
who is the main object of worship. Abhinava does not reject this procedure as just

imagination, because this is essentially how consciousness generates all manifest

phenomena within itself. Although the Deity of Anuttara Trika is the Light of

consciousness, which in itself is formless and not objective, it is free to assume the

forms of deities that serve as the objects of meditation and worship. The point is that
any object of the senses can serve as a basis for meditation, as it is an image of the

divine formed by the imagination, provided that the yogi recognizes it to be a creation of


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

“‘Whatever’ such a yogi who, by virtue of his own (innate) nature,

which is the agent of the five functions (pañcakṛtya) of emanation (persistence,
withdrawal, grace and obscuration), makes manifest ‘externally or internally’,
such as (the colour) blue, pleasure and the like, ‘by his (own) free will’, is his

‘visualization (dhyāna) in the highest sense’, because its nature is (pure)

consciousness alone. The meaning is that it is not something else (like the

visualized form of a deity) which has a fixed ten-armed form or the like.

Surely, if that is the case, then why do (the scriptures) teach the
visualization etc. (ofa deity) with, for example, a fixed ten-armed form?

frrēn f fsrīṝī faīfrra
fa

nirākāre hi ciddhāmni viśvākṛtimaye sati |
phalārthināṁ kācid eva dhyeyatvenākṛtiḥ sthitā || 196 ||
For those (adepts) who aspire to (particular) fruits, some
(particular) form (through which they may attain them) is present within
the formless abode of consciousness, omniform as it is, as the object of their

meditation (dhyeya).”

the divine will of his own essential, divine conscious nature. Note also that, like the

repeated recitation of Mantra (japa), Abhinava classifies this practice as belonging to
the Empowered Means, as it involves the purification of thought, i.e. the application of

thought as a means to worshipping and experiencing sacred consciousness.
” The term dhyāna in the Yogasūtras denotes a state of concentration one may loosely

translate as ‘meditation’. In the context of ritual, the term has an additional meaning.
There dhyāna is the visualization meditation of the deity that is the object of worship,

and so incidentally, of concentration. As a preliminary to worship, the form of the deity

is generated in and through the imagination. The highest development of this creative
power of consciousness is its capacity to generate all things, which the yogi who has

recognized his identity with it possesses. Thus the ŚDr (7/78-80) defines it as follows:

‘Here (what is meant by) dhyāna is that everything is viewed with the eye of
contemplation (bhāvanā) as being omniform; wise (indeed) is that contemplation (cintā)
that sees all things. By whatever organ of sense an entity is perceived, there in each
place Śiva’s state is perceived as (truly) existing — that too is described as being dhyāna.
In whatever perception, (the notion) comes to mind that ‘I am Śiva’, that too is said to
be visualization that (occurs) in that very way within that thought (cintā).’ See above
note 4,357 to TĀ 4/122cd-123ab for a full translation of ŚDr 7/78-106.
According to the VBh (v. 146): ʻVisualizationis an unwavering mind (buddhī),

formless and without support. Visualization is not the act of imagining the body (of a

deity) with eyes, mouth and hands etc.”

Ṃ This verse corresponds to MVV 2/135 with no variants. Particular objects of
meditation give rise to their own specific fruits because, whatever their form, they are

all within formless consciousness as forms of it. Those yogis who desire some particular
fruit meditate on one or other of the forms. Those who seek liberation contemplate the
formless aspect.

TANTRĀḶOKA

‘Formless’ means without a fixed form.

Surely (one may ask,) if the abode of consciousness is omniform, then

how is it that it manifests in a fixed (particular) form by rejecting the
manifestation of its other forms? With this doubt in mind, he says:

īd TōIIRT |

Ép_izGVGEEĀEEEVPSĪĒE: ;KKṈI

I| 22¢ 1I
yathā hy abhedāt pūrṇe ‘pi bhāve jalam upāharan |
anyākṛtyapahānena ghaṭam arthayate rasāt || 197 II
tathaiva parameśānanīyatipravījrmbhaṇāt |
kācid evākṛtiḥ kāñcit sūte phalavikalpanām || 198 II

By rejecting other forms (that are of no use to him, a person who) is
engaged in drawing water spontaneously selects a jar, out of what is
present (before him) replete (initially with all its forms), because (they are,

as yet) not distinguished (from one another).” In the same way, due to the

extending (influence of the) Supreme Lord’s ordinance (niyati), (which
determines that specific causes give rise to specific effects), a particular
form (on which the yogi meditates) generates the conception (vikalpana) of
(that particular) fruit. (197-198)
‘(A person who) is engaged in drawing waterʼ, that is, an individual
perceiver (pramātṛ) who needs something that has the specific (niyata) capacity

(arthakriyā) to draw water ‘selects a jar’ that can perform each function (he
requires) ‘spontaneously° out of the gradation of things (that may be) required
(for that particular job). (He does this) having rejected the manifestation of other
forms, such as ‘gold’ (for which he has no use) ‘out of that which is present
(before him), associated with countless manifestations such as a jar, ‘replete’

with the manifestations of ‘clay-nessʼ, ‘gold-ness’ and ‘jar-nessʼ etc., because
(in the initial moment of manifestation they) are ‘indistinguished’, that is,

undivided from one another.™ The meaning is that the manifestation of that
(jar) takes place in this way.””'

MVV 2/136ab: hy abhedasaṅpūrṇe bhāve ‘py udakam āharan, TĀ 4/197ab: hy
abhedāt pūrṇe ‘pi bhāve jalam upāharan There is no essential difference in the

meaning. MVV 2/136cd-137 = 4/197cd-198 with no variants.
” According to the Doctrine of Manifestation (ābhāsavāda) elaborated in the
Pratyabhijñā, everything is a manifold of manifestations (ābhāsa) of consciousness.

This is true from the most universal level down to the smallest particular. Viewed in this
perspective, an entity is a pleroma of manifestations which are part of the pleroma of all

the countless manifestations of consciousness as each and every thing. Thus, each
object, perception, or indeed, perceiver within consciousness, at one with it, is a single
complete (piūrṇa) whole, as the totality of its manifestation. Moreover, each aggregate is

the one totality (pūrṇatā), which is measureless consciousness. Such then is the


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


‘In the same way’, although the abode of consciousness is omniform,
by rejecting other forms (that are not required), by the Supreme Lord’s glorious

power of constraint (which determines that specific causes should give rise to
particular effects), ‘a particular form,’ of whatever it be ‘(on which the yogi
meditates), generates the conception (vikalpana) of (that particular) fruit’.

So it is was rightly said that ‘for those (adepts) who aspire to (particular) fruits,

some (particular) form (through which they may attain them) is present (within

consciousness) as the object of their meditation (dhyeya).’””

Now he says that the unconditioned (and undivided) form (of
consciousness) manifests to (an individual who has no desire for any particular
fruit, and s0) has no need of anything that has some (particular) fixed function
(arthakriyā) (to get it).

yas tu saṁpūrṇaḥr̥dayo na phalaṁ nāma vāñchati |
tasya viśvākṛtir devī sā cāvacchedavarjanā || 199 |l

plenitude (pūrṇatā) of consciousness that every single thing, as a manifestation of
consciousness, is all of it. In this way, the nature of every single thing is everything
(sarvaṁ sarvātmakam). This is how everything is experienced in the initial state of

perception. The question now naturally arises, how something which is everything can
be functional in any particular way. Indeed, how can it be distinguished from anything

else, if all things are everything? The answer to this question lies in the manner in
which, at the functional level of day-to-day life, individual entities are conceived with

respect to others and themselves, with regards to their constituent parts (i.e.
manifestations). Certain manifestations are accepted and others rejected, according to

the needs and intentions of the perceiver who wishes to make use of them for some
particular purpose. If someone who owns a golden jar needs money, out of the aggregate
of manifestations that together constitute the jar, he would focus on those related to the

gold from which it is made. But if he wishes to draw water, it would not be of any

concern to him whether the jar is made of expensive gold or just cheap clay. These
relative distinctions are articulated in thought constructs that manifest in the second
moment of perception. Thus, Abhinava explains in the following passage in his
commentary on the Āśvarapratyabhijñā, how the same object appears variously to
different perceivers according to the use they wish to make of it and their state of mind.
“When a person who is depressed and feels that there is nothing (of value for him in the
world) sees the jar, he merely perceives the appearance ‘exists’ (in the form of the
awareness that) ‘it is’. He is not conscious of any other (of its constituent appearances)

at all. An individual who desires to fetch water (perceives) the appearance ‘jar’. The
man who simply wants something that can be taken somewhere and then brought back,
(perceives) the appearance ‘vessel’. The man who desires money (perceives) the

appearance ‘gold’. The man who desires a pleasing object (perceives) the appearance
‘brightness’, while he who wants something solid sees the appearance ‘hardnessʼ. ĪPv 2,

pp. 91-92.

! Read tathātvenāsya for tattvenāsya.

° Above, 4/196cd.

TANTRĀLOKA

However, the form of the Goddess of one whose Heart is completely

full and (s0) desires no fruits, is all things, devoid as She (and he) is of

limitations.”

Thus (according to this teaching), the visualization (dhyāna) of one who
desires worldly benefits has a fixed form, whereas that of one who desires
liberation has no fixed form. This is the division between (these) domains

(viṣaya) (of practice). As he will say:

‘In the case of adepts (sādhaka) and those who desire worldly benefits,

the (specific ritual) procedure (they should follow) (vidhi) is (rīgorously) fixed
by the constraint (ṇniyati) (which determines that a particular action gives rise to
a specific result).™™ (Whereas,) in the case of those who know reality and those
who aspire for liberation, it is free of (any) restriction.’™
Having in this way defined the true nature of visualization, he (now)

also defines that of Mudrā.

Mudrā

ṝz aām sūchũzrīamkrqaīq|

srtāṣa fkafṝśē aī aṁ aaīīa iī (| 3 0001|
kule yogina udriktabhairavīyaparāsavāt |
ghūrṇitasya sthitir dehe mudrā yā kācid eva sā ll 200 ||

The yogi who, though still in the body (kula), is vibrant with the

inebriation (ghūrṇita) of the abundant (udrikta) and most excellent wine of

MVV 2/137 = 4/199 with the following variants: MVV: saṁpūrṇacidvṛttir- “he

whose activity of consciousness is completely full TĀ: saṅpūrṇahrdayo- ʻhe whose
Heart is completely fullʼ. MVV: tasya viśvākṛti dhyānaṁ sarvadaiva vijrmbhate- and
his visualization (meditation) (dhyāna) which is the form of all things unfoldsʼ. TĀ:

tasya viśvākṛtir devī sā cāvacchedavarjanāt — “and his Goddess is the form of all things,
free as She (and he) is of limitationsʼ.

Thus, for them, the rite varies according to the results they aspire to attain.

” This verse is quoted below as 26/55cd-56ab. 1t also appears above ad 1/122cd-123ab
(123).

1 follow Jayaratha, as I must, who explains ‘Kula’ here to mean the body, which is

indeed one of the meanings of the word. But more likely, Abhinava is referring back to
Devī manifest as the divine energies of the body, senses and mind, working together in

the economy of embodied immanence which is Kula. If this interpretation is correct, one

would translate: ‘“Mudrā is whatever be the condition within the body of the yogi who,

(immersed in divine energy of) Kula, is vibrant with the inebriation (ghūrṇita) of the
abundant (udrikta) and most excellent wine of Bhairava (consciousness).” As we shall
see in chapter 32, Mudrā is explained in this way, as the rise of Kuṇḍalinī.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Bhairava (consciousness), whatever be the state (sthiti) within (his) body, is

Mudrā.””

(The word) ‘kule’ (is a locative absolute that means) ‘even when there

still is the bodyʼ. ‘The yogi” who has attained oneness with the Supreme Lord

and so, because (his awareness) is firmly fixed there (on this state of oneness),

has forgotten his embodied state (even when he is still in the body), ‘any state
within (his) body’, upraised and the like, is true Mudrā, the epitome (pratikṛti)
of the power of consciousness. (True Mudrā is) not a posturing (of the body)
(saṁniveśa) formed by some fixed (placement of the) hand etc. (as dictated by

ritual procedure). This is the meaning.” As is said: ‘Mantra is the Sound (of the
resonant awareness of consciousness, whereas) the abiding state (of the body)
(sthiti) is Mudrā’. Those who are outside (our tradition) have also said, with the
same intention: “Mudrā is a certain (undefinable) abiding state.”

Now in order to define the true nature of oblation as well, he says:


Oblation and Recitation of Mantra

3TālTla-TGTāṝũeza

sTīēā%araīarTrrgarũrvraā:
frēs̄ I] 3 02 1

g-: |
3TTT-T
TT-B RITGHTHĪTRTTHT I 3 0R1I

antarindhanasaṁbhāram anapekṣyaiva nityaśaḥ |
jājvalīty akhilākṣaughaprasṛtograśikhaḥ śikhī || 201 I|
bodhāgnau tādṛśe bhāvā viśantas tasya sanmahaḥ |
udrecayanto gacchanti homakarmanimittatām || 202 ||
The fire (of consciousness) burns constantly and intensely, without
need of any other fuel, its awesome flame pouring forth from all the senses.
Phenomena, entering this fire of consciousness, intensifying its glorious

splendour, become the means to offer oblation.” (201-202)

TĀ 4/200ab corresponds to MVV 2/139ab. MVV reads: -rasāsavāt for TĀ: -

parāṣsavāt. Then MVV 2/139cd-140ab reads:

ghūrṇamānasya yaḥ kaścit ko ’py udeti yathā tathā ||
śarīragaḥ samāveśo modanadrāvaṇātmakaḥ |
'‘A certain (ineffable) penetration, the nature of which is to delight (modana)
and melt away (duality) (drāvaṇa), arises within the body of (a yogi) vibrant with

intoxication.”
” The yogi who is at one with God, and thus forgetful of the body, whatever posture he

assumes is a form of the power of consciousness (cit śakti). This is the true nature of

Mudrā.

TĀ 4/201-202ab corresponds to MVV 2/130cd-131, with the following variants.

MVV

reads

—sadbhāvam

for

—saṁbhāram. MVV:: yo jvalatya- TĀ: jājvalīya-. MVV: —prasṛtāgrasikhāśataḥ TĀ:

TANTRĀLOKA


As is said:

‘The (true) offering of libation (tarpaṇa) to fire is the process of
reducing to ashes (all) phenomena in the fire called consciousness, crooked with

the network of the flames of the seven senses.”


My teacher (has said,) with the same intention:

‘Those whose nature is indestructible, minds satisfied (viśvasta) and

(consciousness) extensively expanded, assuming bodies of consciousness,

(offer) the universe perpetually (in oblation to consciousness), making (the

invocation) ‘vaṣar’ with great force. The moment of purification (avabhṛtha) of

those great sacrificers,” engaged in the sport of the perpetual sacrifice of all

sacrificial victims, is (never), I believe, seen to wane (kṣīṇasthiti), even for a

moment.

praṣr̥tograśikhaḥ śikhī. MVV: tatraiva sarvabhāvānāṁ praviśec cid vimṛṣśyate TĀ:

bodhāgnau tādrśe bhāvā viśantas tasya sanmahaḥ.
MVV 2/132-133ab teaches the inner offering to the fire (homa) according to the


Bhairavakrama:


‘Surely, as (their) gross nature has been burnt away, (phenomena) become by
their very nature, forcefully (haṭhāt) in an instant, one with the greatly flaming light of
(awakened) consciousness. This is considered to be the supreme offering to the fire
(homa) according to Bhairava’s tradition (bhairavīyakrama).”

(262).

MVV 2/133 (which follows 133ab in a different metre) = TĀ 3/262cd-263ab

According to the VBh (149), the inner ‘oblation is the offering of all the gross

elements, senses and their objects along with the mind into the fire which is the abode of
the Great Void, by means of the sacrificial ladle of awareness (cetanā).

Śivopādhyāya defines cetanā as ‘the power that contemplates (and conjoins) all

things’ (viśvānusaṁdhātṛ śaktiḥ).

According to the ŚDr (7/90cd-92ab): ““AI things are forms of Śiva and they
are within Śiva’s fire. I am He — Śiva who is well content!” This is said to be the
supreme offering to the fire (homa). What is not mine in (this) form here, is mine in
(some) other form. Thus, because of the contentment (I feel), I am devoid of craving.
Such is the offering to the fire.”

According to an Upanisad, the sacred fire is said to have seven flames corresponding
to seven goddesses, the names of which are associated with Kālī. Here the seven flames
of fire are understood to be the energies of the seven senses, which are presumably the
five senses of sight, taste, touch, smell and hearing, along with mind (manas) and
intellect (buddhi).

Ṟead -mahāyajināṁ for mahāyajvanāṁ.

The printed edition reads -saṁtatasarvameyayajana- ‘the perpetual sacrifice of all
objectivity’, whereas MSs Ch, Jh, Ñ, and T read: -saṁtatasarvamedhayajana- ʻ‘the
perpetual sacrifice of all sacrificial victims’. The reading in the MSs, which I have

adopted, is supported by an instance of practically the same expression in another

citation Jayaratha makes from his teacher’s work in TĀv ad 5/66cd-67ab (66cd-66ef).
There the author refers to himself as the sacrificer in the viśvamedhamayayajña — ‘the

sacrifice made of all sacrificial victims’. The sacrifice is no doubt death, of which all
living beings are the sacrificial victims.

The word ‘avabhr̥ta’ literally means ‘carried off or ‘removed’. In the context of
Vedic ritual, it denotes the ablution of the sacrificer and sacrificial vessels after the


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

(The exercise of this reflective awareness) is not only of benefit to

oneself, because it brings about entry into the supreme nature, but also to others.

Accordingly, he (now) says that:


ĀKPETIENIEHIĒETIEEIGṬEIṬ

tnīnī tā mzrtra 7āē 1 33 1|
yaṁ kañcit parameśānaśaktipātapavitritam |
purobhāvya svayaṁ tiṣṭhed uktavad dīkṣitas tu saḥ || 203 |I
Whoever has been purified by the Supreme Lord’s (gracious)
descent of power (śaktipāta), (and the teacher beholds) standing before him,
is spontaneously initiated in the manner described, (by the devout practice

of the true recitation of Mantra).

According to (the following) words, there is no fixed rule (that only
some particular person is fit to receive initiation; rather it may be) ‘whoever has
been purified by the Supreme Lord’s (gracious) descent of power
(Śśaktipāta):
‘(A Brahmin) who knows the four Vedas is not dear to me. (One should
not give initiation to one like him). It should be given (instead) to someone who

is my devotee (madbhakta), even if he be an outcaste (śvapaca), and it should

be taken from him. He is worthy of worship just (as much) as I am.

completion of a sacrifice that removes their impurities. In this context presumably it
refers to the moment of final purification of these sacrificers themselves once they have
offered all the victims, that is, all forms of objectivity, into the fire of consciousness.

Thus, free of even the latent traces of objectivity that may still lay hidden in their
subjective consciousness, their state of perfect purity never ceases.

Once duality has been burnt away and, consumed by the fire of consciousness, has

become one with it, the consciousness beyond all means of realisation
(anupāyasaṁviṭti) dawns, and the Light of No Means shines in its pristine glory,

realised in an instant by the disciple who is has thus been made fit, just by the gracious
look of the teacher. See above 2/40, commentary and notes.

Liṭerally ‘one who cooks (and eats) dogs’.

Thjs verse looks as if it is drawn from the Bhagavadgītā. There, as here in this verse,
Kṛṣṇa repeatedly refers to ‘my devotee’ (madbhakta) as being of special interest to him.

It is a clear stylistic feature of the manner in which he expresses himself. See for
example BhGĪ 6/16 (of the Kashmiri recension), 7/23, and 18/55. Similarly, the repeated
insistence there, as in this verse, that caste distinctions are not important. What makes a
person a Brahmin are his moral qualities, not birth. One of them is that he views all

people equally without prejudice, and another is that devotion to Kṛṣṇa is paramount.
Jayaratha does not tell us his source. It is possible that it is a lost verse from the Gītā,
but this is unlikely if the reference here is to initiation. There is no evidence that at the
time the BhGī was redacted any developed system of initiation existed other than Vedic

in the Sanskritic tradition. Whereas, on the contrary, it is a major distinguishing feature
of the Tantras, the earliest of which postdate the Gītā.

TANTRĀLOKA

Once ‘(the teacher) beholds’ʼ (the disciple) standing before him as the
object of grace, he ‘spontaneously’ abides in his own essential nature by virtue
of (his) steadfast (practice) of the true repetition of Mantra and the rest, as
explained. Thus he, as the neophant who is to receive initiation, is initiated (in
an instant) in the manner described (in the scriptures, with the words,) ‘(the

power of Śiva’s grace) is transmitted (with the intensity and force) of a snake’s

venom . . .ʼ," and so, by the transmission of that (same illumined) nature (the

teacher possesses), ‘(he is illumined) like the flame (of a lamp) that has arisen

from (another) flame.’ The meaning is that by the waning away of the latent

tendencies of (his) fettered identity (pasśuvāsanā), he has attained (a true)
understanding (adhigama) of the supreme principle.
Surely (one may ask,) one may attain repose in one’s own nature from
(the practice of) just one of these — for example, the true repetition of Mantra —
so what is the use of so many of these (practices), like the repetition of Mantra,
that have been taught in this way? With this question in mind, he says:
Conclusion

Viewing Oneself in the Mirror of Inner Meditation and Worship

3afd #le: aṁī aīṁrczi f==sttrāg ] Q.xx 1

japyādau homaparyante yady apy ekaikakarmaṇi |
udeti rūḍhiḥ paramā tathāpītthaṁ nirūpitam || 204 ||

There are two kinds of transmissions of grace. One is mild and takes place gradually.

It is accompanied by effort on the part of the one who receives it. The power of grace is
weak, and its ‘descent’ needs to be repeated many times. But if the disciple is pure and

ready, all he needs to do is desist from exertion and let the power of the grace of Śiva

consciousness shining in the teacher penetrate him. It pervades his consciousness with

great force in a moment. Like the powerful venom ofa poisonous snake, it brings an end
in an instant to the individual subjectivity associated with the body. This is the highest

form of initiation, that takes place by the most intense form of the descent of the power
of grace, which is so powerful, the one who receives it may leave the body permanently

(see below, 13/130).

Ṭhe same phrase is quoted above in TĀv ad 2/40 and 3/291 (290cd-291ab). The
context is always the same, that is, the initiation of the disciple into the supreme state by
a direct transmission of Śiva’s grace, by means of the teacher’s gaze. The repetition of
Mantra and the rest which form part of ritual practice begin at the individual means
(āṇavaopāya). As they develop, Mantras operate in the sphere of the Empowered Means

as the awareness by which thought constructs are purified. Then when that is achieved,

they operate in the Divine Means as the ‘I’ which is the essence of subjectivity, by

virtue of which the traces of past actions and the tendency to form constructs are fully

consumed into consciousness, thus protecting from the danger of further relapse. Then

the aspirant who is thus ready to do so enters, transformed and truly initiated through the
gracious look of the teacher, into the pure Śiva consciousness of No Means, once and
for all.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


The supremely stable state (riṭḍhi) arises in each of these actions
(karman), from the repetition of Mantra to the offering of oblation; even so,
they have (each been) described (separately) in this way.
‘In this wayʼ, that is, as the many kinds (of such practices), like the
repetition of Mantra.
Surely (one may ask,) what is the point of this response to the question
as to how it is that many (means) such as the repetition of Mantra have been
described? With this doubt in mind, he says:

fk̄ī āī aTaTā aTīTāTTŪTTĪGTTTḤI Qo, I
hEIEEIEIEHEEIIEHĀR |EstṛESEUTĒH

yathā hi tatra tatrāśvaḥ samanimnonnatādiṣu |
citre deśe vāhyamāno yātīcchāmātrakalpitām || 205 ||
tathā saṁvidvicitrābhiḥ śāntaghoratarādibhiḥ |
bhaṅgībhir abhito dvaitaṁ tyājitā bhairavāyate l| 206 ||

Just as the course of a horse driven here and there in various

places, on level ground or (up and down) hills and dales, comes to be
directed by (the rider’s) will alone, similarly consciousness, (directed) by
various expedients (bhaṅigi), peaceful, most fierce (ghoratara) and so on,
abandons duality in all respects and becomes Bhairava.” (205-206)

‘Just as a horse driven here and there in various places,’ as is the
playful gait of the vehicle, rocky or dusty etc. land, ‘on level ground or (up
and down) hills and dales, (its course)ʼ circular or otherwise, ‘comes to be
directed byʼ the rider’s ‘will alone’ and is submissive to it. ‘Similarly,
‘” Abhinava is explaining here how the higher forms of Trika ritual he has just
described and the worship of the Trika deities lead to the attainment of supreme

consciousness in the perspective of the Empowered Means, that is, the purification of

thought. The Trika deities, as with those of other Tantric traditions, are variously fierce

or peaceful and benign; by means of them consciousness, directed by the higher
universal subjectivity operating through the individual, traverses the path to liberation,
with its ups and down, terror and tranquillity, thus training his mind until it follows his

will alone. In this way it abandons the false, rebellious notions of duality, with their
pretence of a false independence which, far from being freedom, is really bondage.

These notions, which embody and sustain the sense of difference, are fed by the contrast
between one’s own will and that of universal consciousness. The former, seemingly
free, is actually bound by that very freedom, which is wild and without direction. When
that freedom, which is bondage, is reined in by the true freedom of consciousness,
manifest through its energies in the moments and forms of its worship, notions no
longer obscure the individual’s freedom; rather, of a piece with it, he becomes one with
Bhairava, and shines as the supreme consciousness of Anuttara.

TANTRĀLOKA

consciousnessʼ also, ‘(directed) by various expedients (bhañṅgi)’, such as the
repetition of Mantra and the like, that are ‘peaceful and most fierce
(ghoratara), that is, said to be one with the three energies, Parā, (Parāparā and
Aparā), who are, respectively, not fierce (aghora), fierce (ghora) and most

fierce (ghoratara) by nature," abandons duality (dvaita) all around and
becomes Bhairava’. The meaning is that, having first abandoned duality

(bheda), it shines radiantly as the supreme consciousness of the Absolute

(anuttara)."

Now in order to make the point clear, (so that the disciple may) take it

to heart, he explains (the teaching) by giving another example.

SJĪī SJTTIĀĀT JTāT āIĪTī fITITT: | Q 1

aṛ fēhcTṬā aTTqGTHĪTTT |

yathā purahsthe mukure nijaṁ vaktraṁ vibhāvayan |

bhūyo bhūyas tadekātma vaktraṁ vetti nijātmanaḥ || 207 ||

tathā vikalpamukure dhyānapūjārcanātmani |
ātmānaṁ bhairavaṁ paśyan na cirāt tanmayībhavet || 208 I|
Just as someone who, observing his own face (repeatedly) again and
again in a mirror before (him), knows that it is the same as his own face, in
the same way, beholding himself as Bhairava in the mirror of thought, that
is, visualization (dhyāna), worship (pūjā) and adoration (arcana), he quickly

becomes of His same nature (tanmaya). (207-208)

1 Jayaratha means to say that ‘the ‘expedients’ are the forms of awareness of true

repetition of Mantra etc. in relation to the powers Aghorā, Ghorā and Ghoratarā, that are

emanations of the three goddesses, Parā, Parāparā and Aparā. The Aghorā energies
elevate the individual soul. The Ghorā energies hinder its development, whereas the
Ghoratarā energies cast it down to lower levels. See above, notes 3,231 and 3,245.

! Advaita Vedānta understands the Absolute of the Upaniṣads — the Brahman — to be
impersonal. Accordingly, the gender of the word is neuter. Abhinava, on the contrary,
understands the Absolute to be Anuttara — a masculine noun — to be personal, and so

identifies it with Bhairava. Here in this equation Jayaratha, as happens in many places,
brings together these aspects of ultimate reality as consciousness, the Absolute and
Deity.

See below, 16/38cd-44. Above (TĀv ad 4/2) Jayaratha explained that by practicing

the Empowered Means, thought is progressively purified to ultimately come to rest in
the pure conscious state free of thought constructs by ‘pondering etc. (ādi) on what one

has heardʼ, that is, transmitted through the scriptures and taught by the teacher. The
‘etc.’ (ādi) here implies that this is the first (ādi) way of purifying thought and that there
are others. Here are examples. The standard ritual procedures listed here for worshiping
the Deity can operate as a means to purify thought, thereby transforming it into the

direct insight which is the attainment of the realisation of oneness with it in the
Śāmbhava sphere of practice. This happens if the practitioner applies himself ‘without
delay (acīram) (above, 4/2). In this context, this means that he should repeat Mantra


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

‘Just as’ anyone ‘who, observing his own face (repeatedly) again

and again’, viewing it attentively, ‘in a mirror in front (of himself)ʼ, knows
that that face (in the mirror), which is related to his own as (its) original image,

‘is the same (as his own face)ʼ, by reaching the conclusion that ‘that face is
indeed my own’, considers it to be one with the reflection (in the mirror). In just
the same way, ‘beholding himself’ many times ‘as Bhairava in the mirror of
thoughtʼ, which consists of worship (pūjā) and the rest, he ‘quickly becomes
of His same natureʼ. The meaning is that he attains oneness with (Bhairava).

What is the nature of this state of identity (/anmayībhāva)? He says:


aEPIEEEĒE
TĒI IS- ĀR EAUIEI
tanmayībhāvanaṁ nāma prāptiḥ sānuttarātmani |
This realisation of identity (tanmayībhāvana) (with Bhairava) is the

attainment within the nature of the Absolute (anuttarātman). (209ab)

So, what happens by attaining (this identity) within the nature of the


Absolute? With this doubt in mind, he says:


JJTēīī Tā īTTāī īdā T WJTĀTT I 308II

pūrṇatvasya parā kāṣṭhā sety atra na phalāntaram || 209 ||
That (attainment) is the supreme summit of plenitude, and so there
is no other fruit (beyond it). (209cd)
‘That’ attainment (of identity) within the nature of the Absolute which,

because it is free in every respect of any sense of need (nairākaṅkṣa), ʻis the
and worship etc. in such a way that his thoughts are centred without a break on Deity

and his own pure consciousness. This should be done ‘properly° (añjasa) (ibid.), that is,
without distractions and repeatedly ‘again and again’ (bhūyo bhūyaḥ) (4/7). The

repetition of Mantra, as does worship, entails the activity of the body and mind. As

such, these practices belong to the sphere of the Individual Means, in which the power
to act predominates. Here in the sphere of the Empowered Means, the focus of practice

is the power of cognition. The worshipper is focused on his thoughts and perceptions,
not his actions. It is through them, as they become progressively more immersed in the

purity of the consciousness which is the Deity’s and the worshipper’s ultimate nature,
that he will eventually be graced in a flash of insight with the recognition of their true
nature. Practicing in this way, the notions of Deity, Mantra, worship and the rest become

clear, like a well-polished mirror. Thus ultimately, as in the Śāmbhava Means, the
mirror in which one sees one’s own true nature reflected is the Light of consciousness.

But whereas in that case, it shines directly, free of thought constructs, here in the sphere

of the Empowered Means, the light of the mirror of consciousness shines through them,

in and through each perception. In this way, the Empowered Means with its thought

constructs comes to rest in the Śāmbhava Means, that is free of them and in which the
perceiver recognises his oneness with the Deity. That is his object, which he sees as he

perceives that that is who he is; just as one recognizes oneself in the reflection of one’s

face in a mirror.
1 Read prāptyāpi for prātyāpi.

TANTRĀLOKA

supreme summit of plenitude’, and there could be no other (greater) fruit here
(than this). Here (nothing is lacking, and s0) not even a trace of a sense of need
remains, that one should search for some other fruit. This is the point. An
(indiviḍual) perceiver who feels the need (for something), desiring that
(particular) fruit, initially searches for an appropriate means (to obtain it). It is
like someone who wishes to draw water. Once he obtains a jar, which is the
means to do it, he attains each particular fruit (of its use he needs). Thus,

because a state arises (within him) free of the sense of need, taking the support

(of his) state of indifference, he abides within his own nature. However, that is
not a state of complete (piūrṇa) (satisfaction) free of (all) sense of need, because
at some other time another need arises again. Thus, that is not true

(pāramārthika) (satisfaction), because even though there is still a sense of need,

it is not conceived to be such. Thus, even though the fruit has arisen there (in

that case), one expects another, because there is also another need. However,
when on the contrary there is a true state of plenitude (and complete

satisfaction), there is no (expectation of any) other fruit, because the sense of

need has ceased in all respects.

He says that:


Ũ̄ ̄ Jkca |

phalaṁ sarvam apūrṇatve tatra tatra prakalpitam |
akalpite hi pūrṇatve phalam anyat kim ucyatām || 210 ||
When (one’s own consciousness) is not in a state of perfect plenitude
(apūrṇatva), all the fruits (of the many spiritual disciplines) are conceived

(prakalpita) (to exist in various forms), according to the circumstances
(tatra tatra). Once having attained (that true uncreated and) unconceived

(akalpita) fullness, pray tell what other fruit is there (beyond that)?

‘(Once having attained the uncreated) fullnessʼ, which is the cause of

complete (perfection), ‘according to the circumstancesʼ, with regards to all

(possible) fruits, (the subject is fully satisfied, and so there is nothing more that

needs be achieved).
He concludes this (teaching) with a note of praise (for this liberating
realisation).

uy aṛīṀfafēr. āsf hzaḷṝt fe aia |
aṇaaq Jātīk’r-zīāḥ gIIJISTH: 1| 222 1
eṣa yāgavidhiḥ ko ʻpi kasyāpi hṛdi vartate |
yasya prasīdec ciccakraṁ drāg apaścimajanmanaḥ || 211 ||

l Read tatra tatreti for tareti.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


This ineffable (ko’pi) sacrificial rite (yāgavidhi) takes place in the

Heart of a few (especially graced yogis). He to whom the Wheel of
Consciousness is gracious is liberated in an instant!"
Now (one may ask), is there something unique one possesses by just

realising (adhigama)' (the practice of) this kind of sacrificial procedure
(yāgavidhi), that he has said this? With this doubt in mind, he says:

@ThTērzī
fē %ararariī fēe: 1 32211
atra yāge gato rūḍhiṁ kaivalyam adhigacchati |
lokair ālokyamāno hi dehabandhavidhau sthitaḥ || 212 ||

This verse is MVV 2/141 with no variants. After quoting this verse Maheśvarānanda
says:
tatrāsavasyāntaḥkaraṇaprasādhakatvam | tāmbūlasya śarīraṁ prati bāhyāṇtarobhaya-

śodhakatvam | gandhasya candanādeḥ prācuryeṇa bahiraṅgopasaṁskārakatvam .1|

ca

kramavivakṣā |

tatraiva

keśādimātrādhivāsaprayojakateti

pūrvapūrvaprādhānyāt

‘There (in that sacrificial rite), wine is that which delights the inner mental
organ. Betel is that which, in relation to the body, purifies internally and externally. By

an abundance of fine) scent such as sandalwood, the outer (sacrificial) area is

accordingly purified. The use of flowers is to impart a good smell (adhivāsa) to just the
hair and the like. MM p. 109

Every Means leads to No Means in its own way. Concluding this section,
Abhinava declares how, participating in the rotation of the great Wheel of

Consciousness of the Twelve Kālīs, thought is purified by its grace, and so is

transformed into the direct experience of this ineffable sacrificial rite, with its own

mantra, fire offerings and the rest, that he has just described. There is no ritual, even in
this exalted form, in Sāmbhava practice. There, the power of the will operates in the first
moment of self-awareness, free of thought constructs, as the stream of the energies of

Speech, symbolized by the letters of the alphabet from A to H, as so many forms of
reflective awareness constituting AHAMṀ — the ‘T’ of the subjectivity of Supreme Śiva.
Thisis just awareness, the freedom of consciousness to be all things without losing its
unconditioned nature, preceding knowledge and action. In the domain of the

Empowered Means, differentiated perception operates with the possibility of an
attendant fall into the sphere of duality. This too is the work of the reflective awareness

which is the freedom of consciousness. But here, instead of generating oneness, as in the

sphere of the Divine Means, it also generates duality. If the latter takes the upper hand,

it conceals the former, and so also vice versa. Coexisting in the insight into the
dynamism of consciousness, the sacrificial rite celebrates within it its plenitude, that

embraces all things. This is unity-in-difference and difference-in-unity.

The word adhigama- means to acquire, and (by extension) to understand. Combining
both, we arrive at the meaning ‘realise’.

TANTRĀLOKA

tTHe whose (consciousness) īis firmly established here in this
sacrificial rite (yāga) attains liberation (kaivalya) (even as) the people of the

world continue to see him and he remains within the confines of the

bondage of the body (living the liberated life)."

One who will have no further rebirth and has developed (his
consciousness) ‘here’ in this kind of ‘sacrificial rite’, although ‘he remains’

living ‘within the confines of the bondage of the body, the people of the
world’ who are bound, see him as living (his) daily life on the same level (as
they are), in accord with the saying that:
‘the

condition

in

which

there

is

subject

(grāhyagrāhakabhāva) is common to all embodied beings’.""

and

object

(Even so,) ‘he attains liberation (kaivalya). The meaning is that by

removing the duality which is the state of subject and object, (everything) shines
radiantly (for him) as his own nature alone, which he has recognised to be Śiva.
This then is the difference between one who is liberated and one who is bound,
namely, that even though their daily life (vyavahāra) is just the same,
phenomena manifest for one who is liberated as (if they were) his own limbs,
whereas for one who is bound, (they appear) in accord with (their specific)
mutually separate nature as completely different (from one another and

himself). As is said:

‘Like Maheśvara Himself, one who is liberated considers common
objectivity to be one with himself, whereas one who is bound, on the contrary,
(thinks) that it is extremely different (from himself).’
Thus, the Lord Himself has said the same concerning the state of
liberation while (still) alive (in the body). Accordingly, he says:

"” Veṛses 212 to 270ab are a commentary on MV 18/74-81.
1 212cd = MVV 2/142ab which reads lokenālokyamāno ‘pi for lokair ālokyamāno ‘pi.

Jayaratha accepts the reading here. The singular lokena — ‘by the world’ can also be a
collective ‘by the people’. So, there is no essential difference in the meaning here.
t Cf. VBh 106ab (105ab). grāhyagrāhakabhāvo hi sāmānyaḥ sarvadehinām. The
printed text of the VBh reads grāhyagrāhakasaṁvittiḥ sāmānyā sarvadehīnām — the
perception of subject and object is common to all embodied beings'. The second line

continues: ‘however, attention to their relationship is peculiar to yogis alone.” Abhinava
presents a concise paraphrase of this verse below in 10/204. The full verse is quoted in
the commentary. See note there.

2 Cf. ĪP 4/1/20. The experience of a liberated, embodied soul is that all things manifest

as aspects of his own Self, whereas the experience of the fettered is that they manifest
separately from himself, and that every single thing is uniquely different from
everything else.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------



The Relativity of Prohibitions and Injunctions (niṣedhavidhitulyatva):

Commentary on Chapter Eighteen of the Mālinīvijayottara

T ī: ŪṃHIR ṬRJSRIRJĪSHT]|
atra nāthaḥ samācāraṁ paṭale ʻṣṭādaśe ‘bhyadhāt |
1Here (in this regard), the Lord has taught virtuous conduct

(grounded in the transcendence of opposites) (samācāra) in the eighteenth
chapter (of the Mālinīvijayatantra). (213ab)

arī | 2z1

TaTĪ Īī JaTCĪT] TOITTT ST Jq I| 32
4 1I

āTTaTavīg draṁcma-7 |

TGūTTPZIG TTTĪTITTR T aJT I 2Z I
ccāṝasra
faf= ī nttrzaṟa 1

nātra śuddhir na cāśuddhir na bhakṣyādivicāraṇam || 213 ||
na dvaitaṁ nãpi cãdvaitaṁ liṅgapūjādikaṁ na ca |
na cāpi tatparityāgo niṣparigrahatāpi vā || 214 |
saparigrahatā vāpi jatābhasmādisaṁgrahaḥ |
tattyāgo na vratādīnāṁ caraṇācaraṇaṁ ca yat I| 215 ||
kṣetrādisaṁpraveśaś ca samayādiprapālanam |
parasvarūpaliṅgādi nāmagotrādikaṁ ca yat || 216 ||
nāsmin vidhīyate kūñcin na cāpi pratiṣidhyate |
‘Here (in the practice of this Tantra), there is neither purity nor
impurity, no deliberation on what may (or may not) be eaten (drunk,
l 4/213cd-221ab is a literal quote of MV 18/74-81. The following section, that extends

from 221cd to 278, is Abhinava’s commentary on these verses. Here Abhinava finds his

way through conflicting statements about Śaiva practice by rejecting some provisional

rules, and providing the arguments that can establish a hierarchy of these conflicting
injunctions and prohibitions concerning ritual purity.

” Monier-Williams defines the word samācāra as follows: ‘equal manners or customs,

equal or virtuous conduct ib. mfn. equal or similar in practice or in virtuous conduct ib.
m. procedure, practice, conduct, custom, usage, usual way or method.”

We can understand the technical sense of the term from the context to be
‘behaving equally with respect to the opposites'. Concretely what this means is, for

example, viewing what is commonly considered to be pure and impure as a false
distinction, and acting accordingly. A Brahmin who behaves this way may freely

embrace an untouchable, or eat food such as meat, that is normally considered to be
impure. Clearly, if he did that for any other reason, he would be seriously transgressing.

TANTRĀLOKA

touched) or the like. There is neither duality nor nonduality.® There is no

worship of the Liṅga or the like, neither its abandonment.® There is

neither

(the

renouncer’s

rule)

of

not

caring

to

own

anything

(niṣparigrahatā) nor (the householder’s) engagement with possessions

(saparigrahatā). (Such practices as having) matted hair, (smearing the
body) with ashes and the like are neither rejected (nor enjoined). Such is

also the case with the observance or otherwise of (the ascetic’s) Vows and
the like. Entry into the sacred meeting grounds (kṣetra) etc., the observance
of the Rule etc., (the distinction between) one’s own and others’ (sectarian)

appearance (rūpa), sectarian insignia (liṅga), (initiatory) names and clans
(gotra) or the like —— none are either prescribed or prohibited in this
(Tantra). (213cd-217ab)

a u 221

fe ṁaā āafr fraā- fafaū 1

N fhgoftrra,
gmī farvamft 1 222 1

[eḶIEGIHEJĒCŠEFAGḺE ŠṬIEEEAI

vihitaṁ sarvam evātra pratiṣiddham athāpi ca [c: vā] || 2177 I|
kiṁ tv etad atra deveśi [c: deveśa] niyamena vidhīyate |

ṛn the relevant textual sources, the expressions ‘duality° and ‘nonduality° commonly,
and certainly in this context, refer to the perception of a difference or otherwise between

‘pure’ and ‘impure’. From this perspective, Kaulism teaches ‘nondualityʼ in the sense

that it denies that the distinction between purity and impurity has an objective,
ontological basis. Things are not ‘pure’ or otherwise in themselves. This ‘nonduality is
not essentially a metaphysical concept. Certainly it may be seen, as Abhinava does, that
the reason for this is that there is only one reality, and so that cannot be contaminated by
anything supposed to exist apart from it. Or these two contradictory views are a mistake,
brought about by the mistaken sense of relative distinctions (bheda), due to the deluding
influence of Māyā (4/254). But it is in actual fact quite possible for there to be no sense
of ‘pure’ and ‘impure’ (as opposed to ‘clean or ‘dirty’) in a dualist world view. One

evident example is Christianity, which is not generally considered to be nondualist.

Indeed, those who are totally devoid of religion may be ‘nondualists’ in this sense
without any ontological implications, for which, anyway, they have no concern. In a

Kaula perspective, the contrast between ‘pure’ and ‘impure’ is emblematic of all forms

of duality. And they are the result of the ignorance of reality that binds by the mistaken
identification with the body.

Alṣo quoted above in 4/106-108ab.
See below note 4,930 ad 4/257cd-258ab, where the Kulapañcaśikā īs quoted as

disapproving the growing of matted hair and the wearing of sectarian insignias as do

Śaiva ascetics.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


tattve cetaḥ [c: cetas] sthirīkāryaṁ suprasannena yoginā || 218 II
tac ca yasya yathaiva syāt sa tathaiva samācaret |
tattve niścalacittas tu bhuñjāno viṣayān api |l 219 ||
na saṁspṛśyeta [jh: saṁspṛśeta] doṣaiḥ [c: doṣais] sa padmapatram ivāmbhasā

viṣāpahārimantrādisaṁnaddho bhakṣayann api || 220 ||
viṣaṁ na muhyate tena tadvad yogī mahāmatiḥ |

Everything is prescribed here or else (one could say that everything
is) prohibited. Rather, O queen of the gods, what is strictly enjoined here
is that the well pleased (suprasanna) yogi®” should fix (his) mind firmly on
(ultimate) reality. In whatever way (that is conducive) to that, so should he

practice.

Even though he is engaged in enjoying the objects of the senses
(bhuñjāno viṣayān api), he whose mind does not waiver from reality is
untouched by (their) defects, just as a lotus petal is (unaffected) by water.
He who is armed with the Mantras etc. that counter poison, even if he

ingests it, it does not make him lose his senses. Such is a yogi of great
wisdom.’ (217cd-221ab)

In this way, after (teaching) the true nature of the repetition of Mantra
and the rest, (the teaching concerning) the equality of prohibitions and
injunctions announced in the initial enunciation has been introduced."

MV 18/78ab is quoted in 4/107ab.
MV 18/78cd-79a is also quoted as TĀ 4/108cd-109a. TĀ 4/109b reads tac ca yasya

yathāstv iti and that of whoever in whatever way (possible), which is a condensed

paraphrase of MV 18/79cd. Cf. TĀ 4/120cd-121ab and 4/213cd ff. MV 8/79b reads
suprayatnena yoginā — ‘by the yogi who exerts himself well’ for TĀ 4/218d

suprasannena yoginā — ‘by the well pleased yogi’. It seems likely that Abhinava made
this change in the text. The point he sees the MV is making is that the yogi should focus

his attention on ultimate reality with ease. He should not be strained and tense by
exerting himself.
MV 18/79cd is also quoted in TĀv ad 4/108cd-109ab.

Cf. ṭhe following verse, which is also from chapter eighteen of the MV, where we
find the same expression and idea:

svatantraśivatām eti bhuñjāno viṣayān api |

animīlitadivyākṣo yāvad āste muhūrtakam |l
‘He attains Śiva’s free state even as he enjoys the objects of the senses,
abiding for an auspicious moment (muuhūrta) without closing his divine (organ of)
sense. (MV 18/23)

Ṭhe analysis begins by asking the question whether purity and impurity are intrinsic
to the essential nature of an object. If they are, purification would bring about a
fundamental change in its nature, which is impossible. Moreover, by subscribing to a
materialistic theory of purification, we would have to assume that substances can both
be pure, insofar as they purify objects at an ontological (tattva) level below them, as
well as impure, insofar as they are purified by those above them. If we consider the

mantras to be purifying in all respects, that could only be so by virtue of their identity

TANTRĀLOKA

with Śiva. But if that is true, everything else should be equally pure, because everything
is one with Śiva, and there would be nothing to do. But this is not so. The purity of
mantras lies in their ultimate nature as consciousness, that is, Śiva and the Goddess, that
constitutes their purity. Liīkewise, all levels of reality are pure to the degree in which the
yogi recognises their identity with Śiva. This argument seeks to establish that purity is a
form of salvific knowledge, just as the distinction between pure and impure is a form of

ignorance. In other words, their locus has been shifted from the object to the subject.

See Hanneder 1998: 174. Abhinava writes in his Mālinīvījayavārtika:


‘The distinction between pure and impure has no place in discussions of the

highest reality. But caused by (the necessities of) these (discussions), it is entrenched in
the mind of the ignorant. (105) (Opponent,) if (you say that) the distinction called (that
between) ‘purity and impurityʼ is unreal, then (it must be objected that) the very śāstra
you wish to explain contradicts it. Because here existence (sthiti) is predominantly

dualistic, (as is) frequently (demonstrated) by such (teachings) as the impurity of the
tattvas, and therefore (the necessity of their) purification through initiation. (106-107)
(A) (In reply,) we teach (the following). It is not (the case) that duality is completely

absent from this nonduality, for it is taught that an appearance of duality takes place in
the pervading Lord, although he is free of diversity. (108) This indeed is called bondage

to the world (of transmigration) with words like Māyā or ignorance. Those who are
immersed in it are called ‘transmigratory souls’ (and) their firm belief (niścaya) in
purity and impurity and other (such polarities) stems from their anxiety about sarsāra.
(109-110ab) Moreover, this śāstra teaches Śiva (bhagavad) Yoga thoroughly (samyag).
This Śiva Yoga is said to be nondual and beyond dichotomies. Instruction in this (Yoga)
is given in this way: if (something) is imagined to have a certain amount (yāvat) of

division, it is explained again and again.’ MVV 1/105-110ab, 121cd-122ab. Translation
by Hanneder.

TĀ 4/221cd-225ab roughly corresponds to MVV 2/152-156:

“That which is established (rūḍha) here (within consciousness) does not need
purification of any kind anywhere (in any circumstance). The impure is in the world.

How can it be present within Bhairava’s nature? Even if the flux of the gross elements is
impure, what could be applied to purify it? In this way (it would necessarily entail an)
infinite regress as well a vicious circle and futility. When (the notion of) impurity is

obscured, (what is conceived to be) pure dissolves away. (Pure and impure are relative
concepts. So-called purity) is created by (contrasting it with impurity, its) countercorrelate, not by its inherent nature, as is (the colour) ‘blue’.” Thus, (thinking in this
way,) there is no obstinate clinging to objects of sense, whether it is to appropriate or
reject them. The state of the experiencing (worldly) subjectivity (bhoktṛtā) is the

spontaneous outpouring of the Supreme Bhairava’s Self, which is consciousness. Here

(according to this tradition), everything is enjoined (as beneficial) (vihita) as everything
is proper (fit and reasonable) (yujyate) by this path. Having abandoned the path in this
way, nothing (kiṁcana) anywhere (in any circumstance) becomes appropriate (and
reasonable).”


Also:

‘How should one establish what is to be done or prohibited? How can they be

reasonably possible (upapadyante) here (according to this view)? (In other words, as
things are not by their nature alone intrinsically such that they must be enjoined or

prohibited — how can they be made to be s0?). For all is enjoined here and everything

here is (at the same time also) clearly prohibited. When its prohibition has been
explained (as it truly is), whatever is grounded (āśrita) on the path of nonduality,
although prohibited is enjoined, and that too is prohibited. In this way, this ocean of


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


a) Commentary on the words ‘here (in the practice of this Tantra) there is
neither purity nor impurity.”

=āz fk ēheṝ 7ī zrai rartṭ-ēzq1 222 1

aśuddhaṁ hi kathaṁ nāma dehādyaṁ pāñcabhautikam || 221 |I
prakāśatātirikte kiṁ śuddhyaśuddhī hi vastunaḥ |

““!]ndeed, how can the body and the rest which consists of the five
gross elements be impure? How can purity and impurity (be an intrinsic
one's own consciousness pours out (procchalati) within oneself. Thus, all this universe
is beautiful with cosmic bliss.' MVV 2/232-235ab

Concerning the long discussion that follows from 221¢cd onwards concening the

nature of purity and impurity, Sanderson (2005a: 116) explains that Abhinava ‘takes the

Maālinīvijayottara to be propounding as its final position an enlightened Śaiva
consciousness which enjoys a perfect freedom of practice by embracing and
transcending all the Saiva systems, both those that prescribe specific disciplines and,
finally, nondualist Śaivism, which does not. By prescriptive Śaiviṣm, Abhinavagupta

takes the Mālinīvijayottara to mean both the exoteric or common (sāmānya) Śaivism of
the Siddhāntatantras and a lower Kaula form within the Trika itself, which, though it
throws off many of the externals of exoteric Śaivism, deploys its own limiting structures

in their place. It follows that he took it to include by implication the various Śaiva

systems between these two, that is to say, the Vāma and Dakṣiṇa (Bhairava) systems
and, most importantly, the Mālinīvijayottara’s own non-Kaula form of Trika practice.
The non-prescriptive Śaiviṣm that Abhinavagupta takes the Mālinīvijayottara to have in
mind, is a Trika system beyond even the Kaula level, but an essentialized, internalized

reflex of that level. When these two Kaula levels, with discipline and without, are
distiīnguished, the first is termed the Kula and the second the Kauḷa or, less confusingly,
the Mata. It is to this non-prescriptive level that the Vīrāvalīkula belongs. It is, then, the
highest Tantra only in a penultimate sense, being transcended in the ultimate by the
doctrine of the Malinīvijayottara, which transcends both the uncompromising

transcendence of the non-prescriptive Mata and the compromises of Śiva’s
consciousness, represented by the various prescriptive systems from the lesser Kaula
Trika to the gradualist Siddhānta.”
Sanderson’s assessment may well be correct, but we should not forget that
Abhinava also values highly the prescriptive Kaulism he sees that in the
Mālinīvijayottara is transcended. Thus, the very first teacher Abhinava praises at the
beginning of the Tantrāloka is Matsyendranātha. That is strange if he is the

representative of the form of prescriptive Kaulism that he says should be discarded. The
worship of Matsyendranātha and the other three Kaula teachers that brought Kaula
doctrine into the world in the four Ages (yuga) in the Gurumaṇḍala is standard practice

in all early, developed Kaula schools. We find it in the Krama texts as well as in the

Kubjikā Tantras. The latter present them as the pūrvāmnāya — the ‘preceding tradition’,
in relation to the Kubjikā Tantras that constitute the pasścimāmnāya — the subsequent

tradition. Accordingly, aligning Tika Kaulism, Abhinava presents their maṇḍala for

worship at the beginning of the Kaula rites taught here below in Chapter Twenty-nine.
Clearly, this is a fundamental part of kulaprakriyā of the Trika as it is of the other

Kulas. What then is Kula and Kaula? What Sanderson refers to as the prescriptive Kula

can only be those Kula schools that take Matsyendranātha as the founder of Kaulism, as

TANTRĀLOKA

atṭṭribute) of an entity, independent of its manifest nature (prakāśatā)
(which it derives from consciousness)? (221cd-222ab)
‘The body and the rest which consists of the five gross elements’
contains within itself the entire universe of all (the various) types of things
(padārthajāta), in accord with the teaching that: “this group of five (objects of
sense), form and the rest, is the extent of the universe (of experience). How
can that be impure at all? or, indeed, pure? Even if there is an external reality,
‘how can purity and impurity be independent of its manifest nature
(prakāśatā) (which it derives from consciousness)?” because it cannot (in
itself) bring about (any) change (vikāra), in accord with the principle that ‘blue

is not other than blue’. The point is that (purity and impurity) are not an

Abhīnava does according to Jayaratha who says that he is ‘famous as the one who
brought all the Kula scriptures down to earth (sakalakulaśāstrā-vatārakatayā
prasiddhaḥ). Jayaratha declares that Abhinava mentions him first of all because he was
the original teacher of the Kula modality (kulaprakriyā) of practice. He quotes a passage
stating that the Siddhānta and other Śaiva scriptures pale before the Kulāgama.
Matsyendranātha’s spiritual lineage is recanted in the standard manner we find in Kaula
Tantras (see Dyczkowski 1986: 69-70 and below 29/29cd-33ab). This includes the
listing of the names of his twelve major disciples, six of which are founders of as many
Kaula lineages (29/33cd-42). Abhinava’s Anuttara Trika contains in this way all the

major hallmarks of a Kaula tradition. We see from this discussion that Abhinava does

not prohibit such practices. Indeed, he considers the Kaula sacrificial rite, that involves

offering meat and wine and the like and includes union with a Tantric partner to be the
Foremost Sacrifice (ādyayāga) and as such, the most excellent. One the other hand, he
does not enjoin them either. They may be done, if those engaged in the rite are qualified
to do it, but there is no loss if it is not performed by those who are not qualified, or even
by those who are.

Cf. Sarvācāra (as itis called in PTy p. 236) / Sarvavīra (which is the name in TĀv ad

12/24cd: sarvaṁ pañcātmakaṁ devi na tena rahitaṁ kvacit |
‘O goddess, all have (this same) five-fold (elemental) nature. (Nothing)
anywhere is devoid of that.’ See below TĀv ad 12/24cd where the full passage is
quoted.

Subodhamañjarī 2ab, which is also quoted above in TĀv ad 4/149-150ab. The whole

verse is quoted in TĀv ad 3/4, see note there.

The perception of the colour blue cannot be made into the perception of anything
else. Abhinava quotes the Buddhist Śaṅkarānanda as saying: “a crow need not be black
in the presence of a white goose’ (nahi haṁsasya śuklatve kākaḥ śvetatvam arhati MVV
1/430cd). If purity and impurity are intrinsic qualities of things, it would not be possible
for the impure to become pure, or vice versa. Moreover, everything that appears within
consciousness manifests in such a way that it is perceived to be different from
everything else. If we see the colour blue, for example, it is perceived to be such

because it differs from all that is not blue. The field of manifestation of consciousness
undergoes continuous change in this respect as one manifestation comes to the fore and

all other possible ones that are not manifest recede into the background. This type of

change is termed ‘vikāra’, that is, an ‘alterationʼ. It differs from the other kind of change
termed ‘vivarta’, which is only apparent change. The first kind of change is like the clay
that can be fashioned into a pot or a plate. The product is a result of an ‘alteration’ of its

material cause (the clay). Apparent change is like the snake seemingly produced in the
place of a rope, when we mistake a rope in a dark room to be a snake. Jayaratha is

saying that if there were to be some reality outside consciousness, it could not bring


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


intrinsic attribute (dharma) of an entity (which defines its nature). Thus, as that
which does not possess (a particular intrinsic) quality is not such, (it is
something else), it follows that the distinction between ‘this is pure’ and ‘this is

impureʼ would be compromised.

(Someone may object that) surely, this is contrary to experience,

because (we do) observe without impediment that (the distinction between)

purity and impurity is a part of the daily commerce of life. (To which we
respond that) this is not so. We do not deny that purity and impurity is a part of

the daily commerce of life. Rather we maintain that they are not intrinsic
attributes (dharma) of an entity. It is the perceiver who determines that ‘this is

pure’ and ‘this is impureʼ. If they were to be intrinsic attributes of an entity, an

impure (entity) could never be purified. Nor could one that is pure become
impure. ‘Blue’ could never also be ‘not blue’ because it is impossible to change
the innate nature (of an entity) into something else. If that were so, it would go

against the principle of the scriptures (śruti) (which say):

‘The wise declare that shining® gems and everything made of stone are
(equally) purified by ashes and the like, and so too with earth.
If impurity, which is thus an attribute of the perceiver, were to be

purified by another entity, is that (entity) pure or impure?

about any alteration in the manifestation of consciousness. Consciousness would

continue to manifest, but there would be no alteration within its field of manifestation

and so nothing would appear, and the reality outside consciousness could never
manifest, and hence be experienced to exist.

An entity possesses two types of qualities. One is called ‘guṇa’ and is extrinsic to its
nature. A jar, for example, may be red or black. It makes no difference to its essential
nature as a jar. The other type of quality is called ‘dharma’, which is, on the contrary,
intrinsic to its nature. If the ‘jar-nessʼ of a jar, for example, changes to something else

like ‘cloth-nessʼ, it is no longer a jar. If impurity were to be an intrinsic quality of an

entity, purification would require a change in its essential nature. This means that it
would cease to be one thing (‘an impure entity°) and become another (‘pure entity
).

One could get over this objection by simply saying that ‘purity’ or ‘impurity’ are

secondary qualities, like ‘blue’ or ‘yellow’. However, conceding that amounts to
admitting that nothing is ‘impure’ or ‘pure’ in itself. The point here, it seems, is that if

the nature of something could be changed, then there would be no need to purify or
clean it in some particular way. Moreover, it is indeed possible to purify or clean

something. Otherwise, the scriptures would not explain how to do it. Nor would they

enjoin it if it were not possible. So the question naturally arises that if the distinction
between ‘pure’ and ‘impure’ is just a way of perceiving, how can something which is

impure be purified? Abhinava replies that if outer entities were indeed to be pure or
impure in themselves, they could not be sullied or purified. A so-called pure entity in

the course of cleaning an impure one would itself become impure, and so would need
another to purify it. Thuṣ, the distinction is a perceived difference, not an intrinsic one.

MSs Ch and N read taijasādmāṁ for taijasānāī.
Read bhasmādibhir for bhasmanādbhir.
Even the most precious stones are made of the element Earth. And only earthen

things can clean other earthen things. Thus, a gem, however precious, may be cleaned

with something that is of little value and is, moreover, not itself clean.

TANTRĀLOKA

īcē̄ 1 Ta Jā: THrāīgŪ1a fēT 1 322 1

STqTaIT¥JTTTATṀĀTTTJT
cJTT f |

aśuddhasya ca bhāvasya śuddhiḥ syāt tādṛśaiva kim || 222 ||
anyonyāśrayavaiyarthyānavasthā ittham atra hi

How can something impure be purified by something which is

similar to it? Here in this way (it would necessarily entail the fallacies) of
falling into a vicious circle, futility and infinite regress. (222cd-223ab)
The meaning is that the view there that ‘something impure’, such as
‘earth’, ‘can be purified by something else which is similar’, that is impure,
such as ‘waterʼ, is illogical. ‘“Here in this way’, as will be explained, this would
entail a vicious circle and a series of other fallacies.

He says that:


TIJGTSSTT: JGTGĀĪĪT ATTTT TST I QRX I

prthivī jalataḥ śuddhyej jalaṁ dharaṇitas tathā || 223 ||
anyonyāśrayatā seyam aśuddhatve ‘py ayaṁ kramaḥ |
aśuddhāj jalataḥ śuddhyed dhareti vyarthatā bhavet || 224 |
vāyuto vāriṇo vāyos tejasas tasya vānyataḥ |
If earth could be purified by water, (it should be possible) for water

to be similarly purified by earth (as they are both equally impure gross

elements). This is a vicious circle. The same applies even if (we admit that
they are both) impure. If (one were to maintain that) impure water could
purify (impure) earth, (one is liable to the fallacy) of futility. (Again, if one
were to say) that the water (is purified) by wind, that by fire, and that again
by something else, (the result would be an infinite regress). (223cd-225ab)
If, for example, earth, which is impure, were to be purified by water,

which is (also) impure, then, because there is no difference between them with

respect to their purification, they would (purify) one another. Thus this would
(result in) a vicious circle. In the same way, if something that is impure were to
be rendered impure by something that is impure, then (also), as there is no
difference between them, this (too) is said to be a vicious circle. Thus, he says:

‘tṭhe same applies even if (we admit that they are both) impure.’ In the same

way (the fallacies of) futility and the rest would apply. Now if impure earth, for

example, were to be purified by impure water, then, because both are equally
impure, (why not admit that earth can purify) itself? What is the use of some

other impure entity such as water? Thus (this would entail the fallacy of)


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


futility. Now if earth were to be purified by water and water by air, and that too,
by fire, and that also by something else, like space, and that too by something

else, (it would) thus (entail the fallacy of) infinite regress. In this way, it would

not be possible for something like earth, which is impure, to be purified by
something else which is impure, like water.

(Well then, one may say,) if that is so, then it should be (possible) to

purify (something) with something else that is pure. Thus, he says:

JṃgGĀĪTRGH
TTaATI: ṬIHĪTTJ] JṬGT I 22, 1)
bahurūpãdikã mantrāḥ pãvanãt teṣu śuddhatã || 225 ||

(One could say) that Mantras, such as that of Bahurūpa,” are

sacred, (and so purify the profane elements,) and that therefore they are
inherently pure. (225cd)
(Such Mantras) ‘are sacred’ by their very nature.

Surely (one may ask,) if (you say that the) Mantras which are the sounds
(śabda) that are the attributes of the group of five gross elements, space and the

rest, are pure by their very nature, then why should not Earth and the rest also
not be essentially pure by nature? Thus, he says:

mantrāḥ svabhāvataḥ śuddhā yadi te ‘pi na kūiṁ tathā |
If Mantras are pure by (their very) nature, why should not (the
elements they purify) also be such (insofar as the inherent nature of all
things is essentially one)? (226ab)

Surely (one may ask,) is there not some other reason why Mantras are

sacred, namely, (their essential) Siva nature? With this doubt in mind, he says:

2xē 1

śivātmatā teṣu śuddhīr yadi tatrāpi sā na kim || 226 ||
If (you say) that their purity is because they possess Śiva nature,
why is that not (present) there (in the elements to be purified) also? (226cd)
Surely, if the reason why Mantras are sacred is because of their Śiva

nature, ‘why is that not (present) there’ in the group of five gross elements
‘also’? Śiva nature is said be the essential nature (of all things as) the light of
consciousness. Without that, nothing at all would manifest. Thus, because it

‘Bahurūpa’ ‘Many Forms’ is a name of Svacchandabhairava, more commonly known

as Aghora. He is still very popular amongst Kashmiri Hindus today. See below, 22/2021.

There is a syllabic Mantra corresponding to each one of the gross elements. The
syllable ‘LAM’, for example, corresponds to the element Earth and ‘RAM’ to Fire.

TANTRĀLOKA

would not be possible otherwise (for the gross elements to have a) manifest
nature, thatis their nature (also).

Now, although the Śiva nature of Mantras is the same (as that of the
elements), they are discerned (parijñāna) to be such by virtue of (their)

attributes; (that is, that they induce) reflection (manana) and save (trāṇa)."

This is not the case with Earth and the rest (of the elements. Their Śiva nature is

unknown). The view is that it is because they are different in that respect that

Mantras are pure. Thus, he says:


ī m- rāzāq |

ṬT II Ṝ3I
śivātmatvāparijñānaṁ na mantreṣu dharādivat |
te tena śuddhā iti cet tajjñaptis tarhi śuddhatā || 227 I|
(Again, you may, reply) that one is not ignorant of the Śiva nature
within Mantras (as one is in the case of) Earth and other (elements), and so
they are pure. (Then we would say that) in that case, purity is nothing but
insight (jñapti) into that (Śiva nature).

If that is the case, then purity is said to be the insight that it is the Śiva

nature (of things). Thus, he says: ‘insight (jñapti) into that’.
he says:

And that is the same for Earth and the rest (of the gross elements). Thus,

aīfī s ar aīṀ r̥aṀtar fērgaṣaṁ
yoginaṁ prati sā cāsti bhāveṣv iti viśuddhatā |

(A true) yogi has this (insight with regards to everything), and so all
things possess (this) purity. (228ab)
Those who are (bound) like fettered beasts don’t know that Śiva nature

is present in Mantras also. Thus, as (Mantras) do not perform their functions for
them, they may also be considered to be impure. A (true) Yogi discerns that
(Śiva nature) of Earth and the other (elements), and so they too are perfectly
pure. Indeed, thisis what makes a yogi a yogi, namely, that he discerns that all
this universe is Śiva. As is said:

“! This is a well-known didactic etymology of the word ‘mantra’, which is derived from

man’ and ‘ṭra’. The first is said to mean ‘manana’ — ‘reflection’ (in the sense of deep
thought or concentration) and the second ‘trāṇa’ — ‘savingʼ. These are the two
fundamental and distinctive attributes (dharma) of mantras (at least those that serve as a
means to liberation), namely, that they induce deep reflection and are thereby liberating.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

“Whereas he who knows all these reality levels (tattva) (each) as they

truḷy are is a (true) teacher who, said to be equal to me, reveals the vitality of

Mantras.”

Thusṣ it has been said that, due to the aforestated reasons (yukti), it is not

possible to establish that (phenomenal) entities (bhāva) can be inherently

distinguished as pure or impure.

Surely (an opponent may object): “who has said that the distinction
between the purity and impurity of things is (established) by the power of
reasoned argument (yukti)?” (In actual fact) it is established by scripture. Thus,
he says:

GEEEEIENTcV|ĒCAGIEELHHIEP

nanu codanayā śuddhyaśuddhyādikaviniścayaḥ l| 228 ||
(The opponent may now g0 on to object that,) surely the

determination of the purity or impurity (of an entity) and the like is based
upon scriptural injunction (codanā). (228cd)
‘Scriptural injunction (codanā) is a statement which enjoins (to
action) (vidhāyaka). As is said: ‘scriptural injunction is a statement that impels

“ MV 2/10, also quoted below as TĀ 13/219cd-220ab. MV 2/10ab quoted in TĀv ad

23/77.
bhāvāṉāṁ svātmani śuddhyaśuddhivibhāgo — literally that ‘there is a division

between purity and impurity within the nature of things’.

From here up to verse 238, Abhinava launches into a discussion framed in terms of

one of the basic problems discussed by the Mīmāṁsā, a school of philosophy that
developed a worldview that served to explain the efficacity of the Vedic sacrifice. The
covert influence of the Vedas is surprisingly substantial in a wide variety of ways in the

Śaiva Tantras, especially those of the Siddhānta; they are considered by Trika scriptures
to be, at best, to be a preliminary entry point to the Tantras. They do not, at this stage of
the development of Āgamic Śaiviṣm, play an overtly major role in either its ritual or
doctrinal context. After the twelfth century, largely because of the changed conditions in

India due to the Muslim domination of the north of India, which brought about a
substantial loss of patronage of Hinduism in all its forms, the Vedic and Tantric
traditions came closer together to sustain one another. This was apparent in many ways.

For example, Vedic recitation assumed a more prominent role in īa Siddhānta ritual
in the temples of South India. It became common practice for ritual worship (pājā) in
general to be done with both Vedic and Tantric Mantras. The orders of renunciates

(sannyāsin) founded by Śaṅkara adopted the worship of Śrīvidyā, attributing this

development to Śaṅkara himself. One could cite numerous examples. Abhinava’s vast
erudition covered all the main systems of philosophy, including the Mīmārīsā, to which
he refers several times in his Tantrāloka and elsewhere. The reason for this was not to

integrate Veda into Tantra. Rather it was to establish an exegesis of Śaiva ritual

procedure and attendant matters, such as in this case, the nature of prohibitions and

injunctions, on the same level of sophistication as the Mīmāṁṣā had done for the Vedas
and their rites. Moreover, references to Mīmāṁsā are necessary in order to defend the
evident differences between the Vedic view and the Tantric, especially concerning ritual
purity.

TANTRĀLOKA

(pravartaka) to action’. Whatever is prescribed thereby as being pure is pure,
otherwise it is other than that. As smṛti (declares):
‘The apertures (of the body) above the navel are pure (medhya) in all
respects, whereas those below it are not (amedhya), nor are the (impure)

secretions (mala) that come out of the body."

‘And the likeʼ includes what can be eaten and what not.
Surely (rejoins the opponent), if the reason (nimitta) for the distinction
between purity and impurity is scriptural injunction itself, then let that be, what
defect (is there in that)? However, the cause of the absence of that distinction is
(also) an injunction uttered by Śiva, (when He says), ‘here there is neither purity

nor impurityʼ. He says that:

ittham astu tathāpy eṣā codanaiva śivoditā |

(Our reply is that) we agree, but even so that very injunction is laid
down by Siva (Himself). (229ab)
Surely (one may ask), if in this way there is no difference between (the
injunctions that there is a distinction between ‘pure’ and ‘impure’ and there is
none, as they are both equally) scriptural injunctions, which (of the two) should
be (taken to be) authoritative, on the basis of which we may ascertain
conclusively what is purity, impurity and the rest? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

kā syāt satīti ced etad anyatra pravitānitam || 229 ||
(If then the opponent asks,) which (injunction out of the many
conflicting ones found in scripture) is the true one? (We reply) that (this

matter) has been discussed at length elsewhere. (229cd)

(This matter has been discussed) ‘elsewhereʼ, and so, for fear of
making the book (too) lengthy, it is not discussed here. This is the point. Here

one is free indeed to just understand the (bare) meaning of a word assisted by

convention; (however,) in order to ascertain whether what is said is true or
otherwise, dependence (on other factors) is inevitable, because one must refer to

(some other factors). Thus, (a statement) is authoritative only because it has

been uttered by a competent authority (āpta) (not simply because of what it
means). Otherwise, it is certain that, on the contrary (the statement) is not
Manusmṛti 1/132.

See above, 4/213cd.

See below, 15/170cd-179ab, Chapter Thirty-five and 37/1-32. Possibly Abhinava is
referring to another work, but if it is his, it has been lost.

Read paramukhaprekṣitvāt for puruṣamukhaprekṣitvāt, which makes no sense.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


authoritative (apramāṇa). Thus, moreover, the authoritativeness of an
injunction, whether it be Vedic or one (of our own scriptures), depends solely

on the Supreme Lord, Who has made all duties (dharma) directly evident (to

everybody), and is intent (on acting and instructing) with the desire to elevate

the entire universe, because that is the teaching of all the scriptures. Nor is it

possible to say that Vedic injunction is not made by someone, because it is like
(any) literary composition (racanā), and all compositions are preceded (and
dependent on an) agent.! Thus, there is no essential (sartva) difference between

the two injunctions (that is, Vedic, which enjoins a distinction between pure and
impure, and that of other scriptures that enjoin the contrary. They are both
equally injunctions). And so, we don’t know on what basis we can distinguish in
this way between purity (and impurity). Nor is it reasonable (to maintain) that
one renders invalid the other, because both (injunctions) are of equal strength, as
there is no perception of reason as to why one (of the two injunctions) is weaker
than the other. (The opponent who supports the authority of the Vedas may
object that) surely, there is a reason why one of them is weaker than another,
namely that other scriptures are ‘outside the Veda’ (vedabāhya). As they say:
‘Generally, everybody follows the path of the Vedas; any scripture

(āgama) that is outside the Veda (vedabāḥya) is (nothing but) deceit.”

Thus, other scriptures are (effectively) refuted by the Veda.
Accordingly, on that basis, the distinction between purity and the rest is sound
(as the Veda suṣṭains it).

Surely, (the fallacy with this argument is that), if that is the case, the
same reasoning (is applicable to the Vedas as being) external to (the Tantras).
Read -nikhiladharmaḥ for -nikhiladharmā.

Read na ca for naca.

The common meaning of words may be known by just knowing the convention that
particular words have certain meanings. Although this is sufficient to understand the

bare meaning of the words of the scriptures, this is not enough. In order to understand
more that is not directly expressed or implicit, we must refer to the author’s intention.
Moreover, we need to know whether what is stated is correct or not. All this can only be

known from one who knows it, and so is an apt authority. In both cases, in this context,

the author and the authority is Śiva. The Vedic belief, systematically elaborated by the
Mīmāṁsṣā, is that the Vedas are not created. They have no author. They are
‘apauruṣeya, which literally means that they do not belong to or are made by any
person (puruṣa). The word ‘person’ in this context does not just denote an individual
human being, it also refers to the ‘person’ of Deity. This is not the Śaiva view, which

maintains, on the contrary, that all the scriptures, whether Vedic or Tantric, are uttered
by Deity. Jayaratha, seemingly summarizing the arguments to which Abhinava refers,

advances the following reasons against the Vedic view. One is that the Vedas are

literary compositions, and all compositions must have an author. In this case, the author
can only be Śiva, so it is to His words that we should turn our attention.

Cf. below, note 4,909 to TĀv on 4/25 lcd.

When a doctrine or scripture is said to be ‘vedabāḥhya’, which literally means ‘outside

the Veda’, as is Buddhism, for example, it is tantamount to saying that it is heretical. If
Saiva scriptures are ‘outside the Veda’ (which Abhinava would be happy to accept),

their injunctions are from a Vedika’s point of views less authoritative than those of the
Veda or, indeed, not at all. See Dyczkowski 1988: 8-10.

TANTRĀLOKA

As they are equally ‘other” (taditaḥ) to (one another), why should the Vedic
injunctions also not be refuted by that (other scripture)? We don’t see any
reason as to why just one (of the two) should be a strong (authority) in such a
way that the other must necessarily be rendered invalid (by it). He says that:

fk ra 1

vaidikyā bādhiteyaṁ ced viparītaṁ na kiṁ bhavet |
If (one objects that the injunctions of the Śaiva scriptures) are
rendered invalid by those of the Vedas, then (we reply by asking,) why

should the contrary also not be the case? (230ab)

Surely, (an opponent may object,) if that is the case, as they (i.e. the
Vedas and the Tantras) are mutually in conflict, then both would be (equally)
devoid of authority. Would the result not be that nothing could be established
(to be true)? (We reply that that is) not so, because they are both (equally)
impelled by the Lord, (whose impulse) is the powerful cause of the
authoritativeness (of scripture). Then (one may object that) is it not easy to

remedy (sutara)° (the problem concerning) the cause of their lack of authority,

namely that they contradict one another, even if there is only one teacher (of
both Vedic and Tantric scriptures). (We say that that is) not so, (differences in

the teaching are not contradictions,) because the teaching is such in accord with
the difference between the people fit (to receive it). The Lord has enjoined

purity and the like as the common general (rule) as applicable to everybody,
whereas this (doctrine) is only for (a few) particular (people).® Thus neither of

them are liable to the defect of lacking authority, because both injunctions
pertain to different areas (of applicability). Thus, it has been established that
there is no difference in their essential nature (sattva) (as injunctions).

Surely, (an opponent may ask,) how can there be no difference in their

essential nature (sattva) (as injunctions), even if the injunction concerning
purity and the rest operates for everybody (equally), because in some area (of its

application) it is invalidated (bādha)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Cr. below, 4/251ab and commentary. Also, discussion in 15/171cd-179ab.
Read sutaram- for sutarām.

The distinction between a common, general teaching (sāmānya) and a special or
specific (visiṣṭa) one is a way to allow for the acceptance of the authoritativeness of all
scripture, as all equally taught by Śiva, and at the same time to accommodate a

hierarchy within them. In this perspective, the lowest scriptures are the most general
ones that are accepted by all. From the Trika point of view, the most general, and hence
the lowest, are the Vedas. Higher ones are special and meant only for initiates into the

practices taught by those specific scriptures. Thus, the gradation of scripture
corresponds to grades of initiations. Those who have received a higher initiation have

access to higher scripture, which have specific teachings, whereas those who have had
lower ones only have access to more general ones. Thus the ‘general’ teachings become
more extensive as one moves up, just as the specific ones become progressively more

specific. If the higher, more specific teachings are in apparent conflict with the lower
general ones, these should be abandoned for the former.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


gTĪTTĀT
aTHIī fīfrzēkrṛaīaīaā; IṂ Ḷ30 1

fāri |

samyak cen manyase bādho viśiṣṭaviṣayatvataḥ || 230 l|
apavādena kartavyaḥ sāmānyavihite vidhau |
If you were to correctly understand the nature of invalidation
(bādha), (you would see that) it is to be applied in a particular case as an
exception (apavāda) (to a general rule, while the latter continues to be
enjoined) in the common (universally) applied injunctions. (230cd-231ab)
If you were to correctly understand how the invalidation (of one rule by

another) is averted, then (you would see how) the essential nature of any

injunction is not compromised. Thus, those who understand the statements
(vākya) (of the scriptures maintain that) the rule concerning an exception
(apavādavidhi), which is essentially a particular case, invalidates a general rule

(utsargavidhi), which is a general case (normally) applicable in all cases
(sarvatra), because it has no occasion (to be applied). Even though a general
rule is well established, being fixed in all fields (of its application), once a
particular area (of application) of an exceptional rule has been taken into

consideration, it is applied without being invalidated in (some) other area (of

application). As the Cūrṇikākāra says:

‘Once the area (of application) of an exception has been taken into

consideration, then the general (rule) is applied.”

Therefore, even though (an injunction) is subject to invalidation in some

(circumstances), there is no need to doubt that it is devoid of authority, because

in some other area (of application) it is as established as authoritative.
Invalidation is of two kinds, according to whether it (arises) because (two or
more rules) give rise to the same result (samānakāryakāritva) or because (they
are) contradictory. (Take, for example, the injunction that) ‘one should infuse

life into water by means of the ladle (camasa).” Accordingly, (this type of)

ladle is generally prescribed to infuse the waters with life (in the course of a
Vedic rite). (However, it is also said that) ‘one who desires domestic animals
should infuse life (into the waters) by milking a cow.” As the person who
desires domestic animals is a particular object (of application of the injunction),

the procedure of milking a cow is an exception which, because it gives the same
result, namely, the infusing of life into the waters, invalidates (the general

injunction as to how this is to be done). (Again, according to the rule) ‘the

sacrificial post has eight supportsʼ, a sacrificial post with eight supports is
prescribed in general for all sacrificial rites. Even so, (this prescription) is
invalidated by the exception (enjoined by the rule that) ‘for the Vājapeya (rite
the sacrificial post) has four supportsʼ, because it contradicts it.
A camasa īs a veṣsel used at Vedic sacrifices to drink Soma. It is a kind of flat dish,
cup or ladle, which is generally square and has a handle.

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask), even though this is so, what does this have to do
with the point (being discussed)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

if̄q √ aīērī ta ar amfa afīīg 1

śuddhyaśuddhī ca sāmānyavihite tattvabodhini || 231 ||

puṁsi te bādhite eva tathā cātreti varṇitam |

Thus, what is meant here (in the passage from the Mālinīvijayottara

we are discussing) is that, while (rules governing) purity and impurity
are generally prescribed (for everyone), they are invalidated (in the special
case) of an individual who has awakened to the (true nature) of reality

(tattva). (231cd-232ab)

Although (the rules governing) ‘purity and impurity that are
generally prescribed’ by Vedic injunction are applicable to everybody, in the
(special) case of one who knows (the true nature of) reality, ‘they are
invalidatedʼ, because (for them the rule) is contrary (to it). The meaning is that
they are not, not invalidated (i.e. they are invalidated). The reason for that is

‘thus what is meant hereʼ, that is, that ‘here there is neither purity nor

impurity is an injunction (vidhivākya) which is an exception, that applies to
one who knows reality. This is the meaning.

(An opponent may object that) surely it is not right to say that here (in
this case) (this is) an injunction, because it is seen in the everyday world that the
distinction between purity and impurity is not invalidated, as that would be
contrary to other valid means of knowledge, including direct perception (which
testifies that people do commonly observe this distinction). Thus, one must
necessarily consider this (statement) to be a eulogy of the deities (arthavāda)

(not an injunction), and that is generally said to be in agreement with an
injunction (vidhi). Thus, that (eulogy) has a meaning by virtue of the meaning of
that (original injunction), not in itself. Thus, because there is no (distinction)

between its own nature and that of the other, (the affirmation that it is) a
different (distinct) authority is contradicted.®' Faith in the injunction develops
Ḷ See below, 4/246cd-247ab.
See above, 4/213.c.

t According to the Mīmāṁsā, the Vedas and allied literature consist of two kinds of
statements,

namely,

injunctions

(which

include

prohibitions)

(vidhivākya)

and

descriptive eulogies (arthavāda).
l The opponent now says that another way of overcoming the contradiction between
the two, that is, the Vedic injunction that we must observe the distinction between ‘pure’
and ‘impure’, and the other that denies it, is to say that the Vedic is the original
injunction. The statement in the Mālinīvijaya that ‘there is neither purity nor impurity’

should not be understood to be another injunction, rather it is a eulogy of the Vedic

injunction. In other words, the MV supports the Vedic injunction which seems to be
contrary to it, by saying that for those who are ignorant of the Veda and do not observe
right conduct (dharma), there is neither impurity nor purity. Moreover, without the prior


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


by means of eulogy, due to which people engage (in the prescribed procedure)
with reverence. As they say:
‘(When) the power of injunction wanes, its eulogy removes ignorance

(with regard to it).”


Thuṣ:


‘(The yogi) should not worship a Liṅga made of clay, stone, metal,
crystal and the like (made of inert matter), rather he should worship the inner
(ādhyātmika) Liṅga, where (the whole universe of) moving and immobile

things, dissolves away (līna).”“

(Is what is meant by such injunctions) that the yogi who is free of all
thought constructs, hearing (them), should (reflect on and) execute (them)
(bhāvya)? Or is the eulogy of an injunction which is conceived (in this way just)

something extra (śeṣabhūta) that serves to stimulates the desire (to observe it)?


With this doubt in mind, he says:


aīaēī aīēāk Taq I| 23 1
ṀNor can one doubt that the words of the Great Lord (are not

prescriptive but merely) eulogy (arthavāda) or the like. (232cd)

injunction concerning purity, the statement in the MV would make no sense
independently. Thus, they are not separate statements. Rather they can only be
understood in light of one another.
MV 18/2cd-3ab. MV 18/3a is quoted in TĀv ad 27/1. MV 18/2cd-3 is quoted in TĀv
ad 5/121cd (120cd).

In the SvTu ad 1/45ab, Kṣemarāja quotes a verse saying that it is stated by his
teacher, Abhinavagupta, in the Tantrāloka (asmadgurubhir api tantrāloke ‘bhihitam).

This reads:

vidhivākyam idaṁ caiva nārthavādaḥ kadācana |
nārthavādābhirūpatvaṁ vākye māheśvare bhavet ||
‘And this is (all) an injunction (vidhivākya); there is never any eulogy (at all
anywhere in it). There is no conformity to (the nature of a) eulogy (arthavāda) in the

words of the Great Lord.”

The second line appears to be a variant of TĀ 4/232cd. Kṣemarāja reads the
third quarter as nārthavādābhirūpatvaṁ for nārthavādādiśaṅkā. The second half of the
line is the same. The first line is practically the same as the first line of the verse quoted
by Jayaratha. The only difference is that Kṣemarāja reads caiva for tantraṁ.

According to the Mīmārṁsā, the Vedas are divided into two parts. One consists of the

verses of the Vedas — the Mantras — and the other the Brāhmaṇa, which consists of all
that is Vedic, but not Mantra (i.e. the Vedas themselves). Again, the statements in the
Brāhmaṇas are of two kinds. Those that are prescriptive (viddhivākya) (for example, ‘he

who desires heaven should offer sacrifice’) and those that are not injunctions but are
purely descriptive or declamatory. The latter statements are called ‘arthavāda’-

TANTRĀLOKA


As is said:

“This Tantra is (all) an injunction (vidhivākya); there is never any

eulogy (at all anywhere in it). (It applies) immediately (both) to sins
(pratyavāyeṣu) as well as the fruits of good actions.”
Similarly,

‘The Śaiva Āgama is not eulogy.”
By describing (the words of scripture as those) ‘of the Great Lord’ he
states (their) cause, which is the vitalizing impulse of the Great Lord. The point
is that whatever an intelligent being enjoins (and undertakes) is never useless
(and without meaning).

Again, (if this is so,) one may surmise that in the case of (something)
that is not enjoined by an intelligent being, it may be (devoid of meaning), and
s0 he says:

rāfzṇd fk ar hzxā gad vā-q 1

233 1

abuddhipūryaṁ hi tathā saṁsthite satataṁ bhavet |

vyomādirūpe nigame śaṅkā mithyārthatāṁ prati || 233 ||

It is always possible to harbour doubt as to whether the expressed
sense (of a passage) in the Veda (nigama) is false (and so should be
interpreted in a different manner). This is because (the Veda, which

consists of both prescription and eulogy, is eternal) and not the work of an

intelligent being (abuddhipūrva) (as are the Śaiva scriptures), and so is like

‘eulogiesʼ. Eulogies may sometimes be narratives of mythical events with a symbolic

sense (for example, ‘Prajāpati cut off his own fat’). They should not be considered to be

useless or without purpose, rather they should be associated with statements that are

injunctive which they serve to explain or complete. In order to understand their
meaning, the exegete refers to their figurative or metaphorical sense. According to

Abhinavagupta, the Lord's words are not just more or less vain exclamations, they do
not convey a non-literal meaning, but are injunctions that have a well determined sense,

value and specific function. The main sources concening arthavāda are ŚBh 1/2 ff. and
the Tantravārtika of Kumārīḻa (1/2 ff.). Jayaratha writes in his HCC (33/3-6) that:

‘There is only truth in the things taught by the Omniscient One to favour the creatures

out of His compassion (for them). Śaiva doctrine generally consists of injunctions, not

irrelevant descriptions. Indeed, how can He whose activity depends solely on His will
say something false? For what reason would He Who is omniscient and omnipotent say
things that are untrue? If the Lord wished to change the form of things, they would
automatically manifest in a different form, insofar as His action is His will itself.’

This statement is quoted again below in TĀv ad 35/40ab. This view can be contrasted
with that of the Siddhāntin Sadyojyotiḥ, who talks of anuvādasūtras
arthavādasūtras as being part of Tantra. See Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha 1, p. 4.

and


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


the nature of space and other similar categories (which according to the
Vedic schools of philosophy are eternal).°

Here, in the case of the Vedic scriptures, it is ‘always’ possible for
those who examine them, when they hear their prescriptions and eulogies ‘to
harbour doubt’ as to whether their ‘expressed sense is false’, and the subject
(to which they refer) is something unreal (and incorrect). This is because

according to othersʼ view, they are, like the roar of (storm) clouds, ‘not the

work of an intelligent being’, that is, in the form of prescriptions and eulogies

that are not produced by an intelligent being. Thus, because they are as if
emptiness and so are devoid of meaning (and purpose) (anarthakya), they are
said to be ‘like the nature of space’. It is said elsewhere with the same
intended sense:
‘Taking their support from God Who, without beginning, is the Lord, as
a (trustworthy) authority, people have faith in the words of the Vedas. It was
said before that no intelligent person has faith in them (just) because no one
created them.”
Where, on the contrary, the Supreme Lord Who is unconditioned
consciousness (vijīāna) abides in the form of scripture, how could there be
(any) doubt that it is (may be) false? Thus, he says:

anavacchinnavijñānavaiśvarūpyasunirbharaḥ |
śāstrātmanā sthito devo mithyātvaṁ kvāpi nārhati || 234 ||

(But) in no case is it possible that (the Śaiva scriptures) are false,
because it is the Lord (Himself) who, perfectly full with the omniformity of

His unconditioned consciousness, abides as the essential nature of the
scriptures (śāstrātmanā).

‘In no case is it possible that (the Śaiva scriptures) are falseʼ, for the
reason given in the rest of the verse.
Surely, (an opponent may ask, that) we have understood that the Lord is
the author (praṇetr) of all the scriptures, but not that He Himself abides in that
form. How can one assert this novel (view)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

GTaTITTTT
7T] frTsrī̄gārāī: |
TTTJRṬIĪTTJ-TĪ
fṜīTBTg: āā fk̄ 1. 23. 1
icchāvān bhāvarūpeṇa yathā tiṣṭhāsur īśvaraḥ |

See below, Chapter Thirty-six.

TANTRĀLOKA

tatsvarūpābhidhānena tiṣṭhāsuḥ sa tathā sthitaḥ || 235 ||

If the Lord desires to be phenomenal existence (bhāvarūpa), He is

such. In the same way, if He desires to be in the (form of the scripture)
which declares the essential nature of (His universal phenomenal form), He
is such.

The Supreme Lord Who, by the glorious power of His own desire,

wishing to be phenomenal existence, consisting of perceivers and (their) objects

etc., which are objects of denotation (vācya), abides in that way as the universe,

which is the object of denotation (vācya) (of the scripture). In the same way,
with respect to the Word, just as He by Himself assumes another form as the
universe, which is the object of denotation and consists of perceivers and (their)
objects, so too, desiring to be the denotator which denotes that (universe), He
abides as scripture which denotes (it) (vācaka). This is the meaning.
(Thus,) in this way also, even if in some cases the meaning of (the

scripture) were to be false, that too is not a defect. Thus, he says:

-īk-āGd:
aāā-d̄ T TJ ġ fāīaāē: I Q3. |
arthavādo ʻpi yatrānyavidhyādimukham īkṣate |
tatrāstv asatyaḥ svātantrye sa eva tu vidhāyakaḥ || 236 ||
Moreover, even a eulogy which refers to another injunction (or
prohibition) can be false (in the sense that it does not need to indicate a real
object in order to justify the prescription with which it is associated). It has

a normative value (vidhāyaka) (when it appears) independently.

Where a eulogy, be it (one by way of) praise or blame etc., becomes
(associated as) an ancillary (aṅga) to another normative prescription
(vidhivākya), be it an injunction or prohibition, then as there (in that case they
are not related) as one thing different to another, then that (eulogy) may be false
without that being a defect at all. One should not understand its meaning to be
(literally just that) as it is heard to be, but as (referring) either to that which is

enjoined or prohibited (as the case may be), as it is established as an ancillary of
that (prescription). Thus, according to those who know (the nature and form of)
the statements (of the Vedas, eulogy is also an) authoritative (statement), as it
agrees with the normative prescription. As they say:

In certain cases, according to the Mīmārṁsā, passages that are purely descriptive (and

so in that sense are arthavāda) may assume a normative value. Cf. ŚDr 3/67-68ab and

Gnoli 1968: 52-53.

Eulogies are authoritative if they are a part of injunctions. They just support

injunctions and prohibitions by supplying, for example, a myth relating to their origin.
Thus, it is irrelevant whether they refer to phenomenally real things or not.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


‘Thus, as eulogies are in agreement with a normative prescription, they
are authoritative.”
Moreover,
‘One should not place silver on the sacrificial grass (barhis)
Regarding the eulogy which is a part (śeṣabhūta) of this prescription,

(we may refer to the following example. It is said that when he who did so):

‘wept (arodīt) and what he wept is Rudra’s Rudra nature (rudratva) (so ‘rodīd

yad arodīt tad rudrasya rudratvam). (The meaning of this) eulogy is not to be

understood to be Rudra’s weeping and the like. Rather, (it implies that) ‘one
should not place silver on the sacrificial grass (barhis) (because it is said that)
‘within a year there is weeping in the house of one who places silver in front on
the sacrificial grass.” (barhiṣi yo rajataṁ dadāti purāsya saṅvatsarād grṛhe

rodanaṁ bhavati).

Again, if that eulogy does not become an ancillary of (some) other

(prescription), then ‘it has a normative value (vidhāyaka)’, which means that it
establishes (what is to be done) just as heard (on the immediate literal level of

meaning of the scripture).
In the case of a eulogy such as ‘he wept’, it is true, as (the scripture) has
established that ‘Rudra wept and the tear that came from him became silver
(rajata) (rudro ruroda tasya yad aśru aśīryata tad rajatam abhavat). This is
true also for the many (symbolically) similar events (to this one that occur in the
course) ofa sacrifice. As is said:
‘Or else (consider this). Although logicians (naiyāyika) make contact
with the supremacy (paratā) (of their) own essential nature, they fall not from
the path of the validity (of a sound means of knowledge. Even as) they declare
the (transcendental) excellence of man, they also describe the way (what

happens and is done) here (in this world correctly,)
just as it is.’

(A eulogy) does not only (have a normative value, and is) true (when it

appears) independently, but also when it is dependent (on an injunction). Thus,
he says:

faftrarazāī-āḶ īērçṁam ar |

ī fīāḥ tar dṁīrṁīaizaq | z3 1
vidhivākyāntare gacchann aṅgabhāvam athāpi vā |
na nirarthaka evāyaṁ saṁnidher gajaḍādivat || 237 ||

“ According to Monier-Willians’s dictionary, barhis is “that which is plucked up’,

sacrificial grass, a bed or layer of Kuśa grass, usually strewn over the sacrificial ground

and especially over the altar (vedi), to serve as a sacred surface on which to present the
oblations, and as a seat for the gods and for the sacrificers.’

TANTRĀLOKA

Again, even though (a eulogy) may have become (a subordinate)
ancillary of some prescription, by virtue of its association (with that
prescription), it is not meaningless. This is just as is the case with the letters
‘ga’, ‘ja’ and ‘ḍa’, (which are not meaningful alone, but become so) in

conjunction (with one another)."

Although a eulogy ‘may have become (a subordinate) ancillary’ of a

prescription (vidhivākya), which (may be either an) injunction or prohibition, as

it is conjoined to it, it is ‘not meaningless’. The example here ‘is just as is the
case with the letters ‘ga’, ‘ja’ and ‘ḍa’’. Just as letters that are conjoined
together as parts of a word are not meaningless, so is it with this case. If letters

were meaningless, then when the order of letters (in a word) is changed, one

would not understand some different meaning. Moreover, the aggregate (of
letters), such as (the words) ‘gaja’ (‘elephant’), ‘jaḍa’ (‘insentient’) and ‘gaḍa”

(‘ditch)” (formed by conjoining these letters) would also have no meaning.

(If) the parts are without meaning, (their) aggregate would also be meaningless.
Just as one (grain of) sandy soil cannot yield oil, so too a heap which is an
aggregate (of grains of sand) also cannot do so. In the same way, if eulogy were
to be meaningless (and useless) (even if) associated with (a prescription) the
sense of which is to enjoin or prohibit, (it would not give rise to the impulse) to
respectfully act (as prescribed) or desist (from prohibited action). (Eulogies may
also implicitly serve as prescriptions. Thus, for example, the statement quoted
above) ‘he weptʼ etc. was made in order to deprecate silver, which can make
one weep (with suffering it causes), so that one may respectfully desist from
placing that on the sacrificial grass. Personal experience in daily life is a witness
to this fact. (Indeed, a eulogy may run counter to an injunction and be more
effective. So for example, when someone says to others) “this cow should be
sold”, those who (could) buy it do not act (accordingly, as they would impelled)
by words of praise such as ‘this (cow) gives much creamy milk, is well
behaved, and (and by virtue of her auspicious presence one has a fine) woman,
offspring and sinless subjects.”

Thus, he says:


zqṁdīrcaīdrīaa tarāṝda ād |

ād̃ va fatttr̥ēīI. Ṃ 2c 1
svārthapratyāyanaṁ cāsya svasaṁvittyaiva bhāsate |
tadapahnavanaṁ kartuṁ śakyaṁ vidhiniṣedhayoḥ || 238 II

Contiguity with the injunction’s text, on which it depends as eulogy or advice and
with whose form it constitutes a whole, just as letters conjoined together form a whole

with its specific meaning.

Read gaḍaḥ iti saṁghātasyāpi for ṣoḍaḥ iti | saṁghātasyāpī .

There are various views concerning the nature of the most fundamental unit of
meaning. For example, according to the Naiyāyikas, a word is the minimum unit of

meaning. Bhartṛhari maintainṣ that it is the sentence, and the Mīmāṁsakas that it is the
individual letter. Abhinava and Jayaratha are here echoing their arguments in support of
this latter view.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


That (a eulogy) conveys meaning is made manifest by our own
consciousness (svasaṁvitti) and (so too) that it is possible for it to override a
prohibition or an injunction.
Now if (one eulogy can) forcefully override (another one), it can
override the sense of a normative statement (vidhivākya) also, which may be
(either) an injunction or a prohibition. Thus, he says: “(it is possible for it to)
override (a prohibition or injunction)ʼ etc.
One’s own consciousness is not the sole (authority and) means
(pramāṇa) that can establish this (fact); (it can also be established by sound)
reason (yukti). Thus, he says:

aI ā̄TJTPāTṛṝtīzārdraimaggakītī I 338 1
yuktiś cātrāsti vākyeṣu svasaṁvic cāpy abādhitā |
yā samagrārthamāṇikyatattvaniścayakāriṇī || 239 ||
The words of scripture (vākya) conform to reason (yukti). Also, they
do not invalidate the direct experience of one’s own consciousness
(svasaṁvid), which (is immediate and extends) to every particular
(samagrārtha) (in an instant). (It is like the knowledge of an expert jeweller,
through) which (he) determines the exact nature of every particular gem
(instantaneously and correctly).

The ‘reason’ is the one expounded previously.

Surely (an opponent may rejoin that), agreed that (scriptural statements)
may (operate equally well as) eulogies or prescriptions, why worry about that?
However, even there (in that case), the distinction between purity (and impurity)
etc. declared by the Vedic scriptures is in this way invalidated for the
aforestated reason. Thus, nothing is prescribed as being pure nor impure, and
there is no third polarity. Thus, (does this mean) that the prescription concerning
purity and impurity cannot be successfully (observed)? With this doubt in mind,
he says:

sraīā īī gacaīāqgg afrazga 1 2xc 1

mṛtadehe ‘tha dehotthe yā cāśuddhiḥ prakīrtitā |
anyatra neti buddhyantām aśuddhaṁ saṁvidaś cyutam || 240 ||
saṁvittādātmyamāpannaṁ sarvaṁ śuddham ataḥ sthitam |
' The expert jeweller who ascertains the value of a gem in an instant is the cardinal

example of practice in the immediacy of Śāmbhopāya, free of thought constructs. See

above, 1/184cd-185ab and note.

TANTRĀLOKA

May (all come to) realise that the impurity said to be in a corpse, or

what comes from the body, is not present elsewhere (it is solely related to
the body);” and that that which is (seemingly) severed from consciousness

is impure. Everything is one with consciousness and so is pure. (240-

241ab)

It is said in the Vedic scriptures that impurity (inheres) ‘in a corpse’ or
in the secretions (mala) etc. that come from the body, (but) ‘it is not present
elsewhereʼ; that is, not in the secretions (mala) etc. of the body when (they are)

within the living body. Thus, because (purity and impurity) relate to whether
(something is) contiguous to consciousness or not, ‘one should thinkʼ, that is,

aṣ there is no reference to any specific (thing), may all understand (and accept)
that everything ‘which is (seemingly) severed’ from the presence of
‘consciousnessʼ and (is apparently) separate from it, ‘is impure’. This is the
meaning. Thuṣ, all that is one with consciousness is pure. It follows that the
distinction between purity and impurity is, in every case, due to the oneness or
otherwise (of something) with consciousness. This is the view, and it has been

proved.

Nor is that (view) proved by just reason, it is also (sustained) by the

scriptures.

Thus, he says:


irūEEiiReck |T-cv.ICṈI

śrīmadvīrāvalau coktaṁ śuddhyaśuddhinirīūpaṇe || 241 ||
sarveṣāṁ vāhako jīvo nāsti kiñcid ajīvakam |
yat kiṁcij jīvarahitam aśuddhaṁ tad vijānata || 242 ||

Moreover, it is said in the venerable Virāvali,˚ in the course of
describing (the nature of) purity and impurity, that life (jiva) is the vehicle
See below, note 4,879.
See below 29/127cd-128ab, where Abhinava explains that meat and sperm etc. are
not impure, because they come from the body, which is proximate to consciousness.
Indeed, their proximity to consciousness makes them pure. Impurity, as he says in this
verse, amounts to separation from consciousness.

The subject treated in the following passage, that is, the purity or otherwise of Kaula
sacrificial substances (dravya), is taken up again in more detail below from 15/164cd ff.

Read na ca for naca.

“” The citation from the Virāvali extends from 241cd to 244ab. Below in Chapter
Twelve, Abhinava discusses the nature of impurity and doubts. Jayaratha ad 12/23cd-

24ab informs us that ‘much is said about this in the seventh chapter (uddeśa) of the

venerable Vīrāvalitantra. This (view) has been corroborated to some extent (with

reference to it) previously°. It appears that he is referring to 4/241cd-244ab. If so, this is
the chapter of the Vīrāvali Abhinava is quoting from.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


(vāhaka) of all things. And there is nothing that is not alive. Know that

whatever is devoid of life is impure.” (241cd-242)

(Abhinavagupta) paraphrases (the Tantra, expressing the sense in his
own) words. ‘Life’ is the Supreme Light that gives life and vitalizes all this
(material universe) born of the Elements, by energizing (uttejana) (the powers

of) knowledge and action." It transports, that is, sustains ‘all things’, namely,

the universe of perceivers and (their) objects. Thus, it is ‘what transports’
(them). The meaning is that it manifests (everything) as well attached

(saṁlagna) to its own (conscious) nature. The reason here (for that is that)

‘ṭhere is nothing that is not alive’. The sense is that nothing at all could

manifest that is (hypothetically) separate from the light (of consciousness).
Again, ‘whatever is devoid of life’ cannot be perceived as one with that, and
(so one should) ‘know that it is impure’, because it is rendered defective by

the odiousness of (logical) impropriety (anupapatti). Thus, one should
understand that (this view of reality) should be abandoned. This is the meaning.
As what is separate from consciousness has in this way been defined as impure,

the (implied) meaning is established that the opposite (namely, all that is not
separate from consciousness) is, on the contrary, pure.

He says that:


tasmād yat saṁvido nātidūre tac chuddhim āvahet |
Therefore, that which is not very distant from consciousness

imparts purity.™" (243ab)

” A corpse is extremely impure. The contents of the body, including excrement, are not
defiling so long as they are in the living body, participating, in a sense in its life. Outside
of the body, the organic whole, its constituents are impure and defiling. Here Abhinava
presents the view that the reason forthis is that they are distanced from consciousness.

Conversely, what is proximate to consciousness is purifying (4/243ab). Abhinava again

appeals to the authority of the Vīrāvali. Noṭe that, although much less impure, the living

body is defiling to varying degrees, according to the caste status of its possessor. If
impurity does not ultimately exist, caste distinctions are similarly false.
According to Utpaladeva, the powers of knowledge and action constitute life. Thus,
he declares that:

‘The being of the insentient depends entirely on the sentient; and the powers of
knowledge and action are the very life of sentient beings.” IP 1/1/3
Abhinava comments: ‘. . . That alone has independent existence which shines

independently of other (things). And because what is said to be insentient cannot exist
independently of the light of consciousness, the view that the power of insentient
entities is revealed to (other) insentient entities is baseless. . . .

This line is quoted below in TĀv ad 29/127cd-128ab. There the reading is as in MS

C tat śuddham āharet for tat śuddhim āvahet. Jayaratha quotes it in the context of the

consumption of sexual fluids produced by orgasm in the course of Kaula ritual. In that

context, the variant reading is more appropriate, for the line would then mean, ‘therefore

that which is not very distant from consciousness is pure and should be eaten’. It

TANTRĀLOKA


That is said there (in the Vīrāvalītantra, where we read):

‘Nothing is impure. Everything is established there (in SŚiva
consciousness). Whatever is devoid of that becomes, for that reason, impure.
Surely, none of the great (realized) souls accept the distinction (made)

in this way between purity and impurity, so how could the wise have faith here
(in this view)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

rf̄āēkcāī rā JTĀĪSTT TATNST | 33 1
avikalpena bhāvena munayo ‘pi tathābhavan || 243 I|
Such was also the (opinion and) condition of the (ancient) sages, by

virtue of (their) state free of (dualistic) thought constructs. (243cd)

‘Such’ (was also the opinion and condition of the ancient sages) means
that the distinction between purity and impurity is due to whether (something) is
at one with consciousness or not. That is said there (in the Vīrāvalītantra, where
we read):
‘In the (ancient) past, the Vedic sages (ṣi) ate beef and human flesh.”
If (the ancient sages) had not known that the purity of the sacrificial
substances (dravya) is their oneness with consciousness, how is it that they
could eat beef and the like, which is contrary to common practice (loka), and
has been banned (bahiṣkṛf) by the scriptures? Thus, according to the following
teaching, when observing outer right conduct (caryā), (the offering to the Deity
and consumption of) sacrificial substances which are contrary to common

practice (loka) and the scriptures are enjoined, in order to destroy (dualistic)

thought constructs:

‘That sacrificial substance which, obnoxious and censored, is abhorred

by the common man (loka) and is banned by the scriptures, should be eaten by

the Heroes (who are adepts in Kaula practice).”

appears that 243ab is Abhinava’s own general observation. 243cd-244ab is a more

direct reflection on the passages Jayaratha supplies from the Virāvalī, which, as
Jayaratha implicitly suggests, may well have been in Abhinava’s mind.

Jayaratha quotes this and the following verse without telling us his source. This may

well be because he assumes it is clear that he is quoting from the same source. Indeed,
they do read well together. Accordingly, I assume that they are also from the Vīrāvalī.

One could cite countless passages from scriptural sources of all traditions of the early

Bhairava Tantras relating to this matter. The following one is drawn from the

Khacakrapañcakastotra (the Hymn to the Spheres of the Five Voids), which
exemplifies the manner in which the five spheres of Yoginīs taught in the Krama school
are worshipped with such sacrificial substances:
“Worship is mystical sexual union (caryākrama). It is sport (krīḍā). The seal
(mudrā) is that exhibited by (the inner mystical) Sound (rava). (The yogi) should offer


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

The true nature of all (these Kaula) sacrificial substances (like meat,

alcohol and sexual fluids) is not that they (are just) contrary to common
practice, rather (the point is that they are essentially) supreme consciousness. So
what if they are obnoxious and censored? (That is irrelevant,) because (the real

point is that) there is no difference in the (the essential) nature of consciousness
anywhere (in any circumstance). Thus, the purpose there is only to examine
(the stability of one’s own) mind (citta), that is, whether the mind is one-

pointedly focused on consciousness or not. As is said:

‘The practice of Kaula sexual union (caryā), that is said to be
awesomely formidable (bhīma), is not taught for the sake of enjoyment.
(Rather) it is done in order to observe whether one’s own mind is firm (and
fixed on ultimate reality) or is fickle.”

Surely (one may ask,) if that is the case, how is it that the sages have
taught that beef and the like should not be eaten? With this doubt in mind, he
says:

the Great Meat (beef and human flesh), fish, liquor, rum and wine, the sacrificial pap
(caru), the flower (of the first menses), and various kinds of song and instrumental
music. (He should do this) as he meditates and repeats mantras (to the Yoginīs) in their
own respective circles, according to their nature.
Then, having heard with (their) mind delighted the Great Sound (of universal

consciousness) (that emerges) from the supreme emptiness (parākāśa) of the Stainless

(Absolute nirañjana), the Yoginīs known as Bhāsā who reside in the Great Abode (of
absolute consciousness) inside the five-fold sequence, and that move within the mystic
penetration into the seal (mudrā of the energy of consciousness), shake, inebriated with
supreme bliss.

The Khecarī (Yoginīs) reside on the path of emptiness, and have dissolved away

into the Supreme Emptiness (yyoman). The Dikcarī (Yoginīs) are the radiance of the

light of the quarters (dik), and are intent on subtle meditation. The Gocarī (Yoginīs)

experience union (yoga) within the Heart (of consciousness), and are generated by the

Self (ātman) and its opposite (anātman). The Bhūcaṁī (Yoginīs) reside in the circle of
the Root (Centre in the body), and illuminate the Nerve of Brahmā. They know the
states of being (bhāva) and, free of them, are generated from being and nonbeing.”
KhCPS 46cd-52.

d Contrary to many peoples’ opinion, even nowadays, the Kaula substances are not

sacred and powerful simply because they are considered impure and obnoxious by the

common Vedic norms and, indeed, most people in general. Kaula practice, at least as
Abhinava understands it, is not about gaining power through transgression. It is about
realizing that everything is equally Siva’s divine consciousness.

The same verse, which is probably from the Vīrāvalītantra, is quoted below in TĀy

ad 29/101cd-102. There instead of the reading bhīmarūpiṇī— ‘awesomely formidable’,
we find kāmasurūpiṇī — ‘beautiful by virtue of the passion (that it arouses). The word

‘bhīma’ means fearful, terrific, terrible, awful, formidable, tremendous and the like. For

a Hindu, eating beef is as obnoxious and sinful as eating human flesh. Ritual sex

practiced in a cremation ground is also bhīma. We find a lengthy and interesting
description of an example of this kind of practice (caryā) in the Brahmayāmala.

Concerning caryā — ‘right conduct’ in general and especially such forms of it, see

Dyczkowski 2009: intro. 1,507 ff. See also below ad 29/98ab-100ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

lokasaṁrakṣaṇārthaṁ tu tat tattvaṁ taiḥ pragopitam |
In order to protect the common man (loka), they kept that reality

(tattva) secret. (244ab)

Taught this way, the common man, who has not attained oneness with

consciousness, would disrupt the common daily order of life (lokayātrā) by
doing that out of greed and lust. Due to the excellence of ‘that reality’, which is
the nonduality of consciousness, that is the ultimately real (pārāmarthika)

nature (of all things), has been ‘kept secret’ and not revealed by (the ploy of
teaching that) each of the (Kaula) sacrificial substances are defective and the
like. This is the meaning. As is said there (in the Vīrāvalītantra, where we read):
‘once known that everything is of the same nature (samarasa), (the Kaula

sacrificial substance) is criticized etc. again (anyway).’ Again, it is said

elsewhere with the same intended sense: ‘one should not do what they do, but

do what they say.’

Surely (one may ask,) if this phenomenal world (bhāvajāta) could not
possibly have an external existence (outside consciousness), then what could be
pure or impure, to which this deliberation could be applied? Again, if it were
(possible for some reality) to come into being (outside consciousness), that

would be just as it is when it comes into being, what (difference does) the
perceiver’s knowledge of it (make)? With this doubt in mind, he explains (the

passage from the Vīrāvalitantra he has quoted):

afē: ūaaifN īa] gGTJGĪ T Tvrq I

One is reminded of chapter 11 of the Bhagavatam, where Kṛṣṇa’s sport with the
cowherd girls (gopi) is described. There too, the Purāṇa warns that one should do what
Kṛṣṇa says, not what he does. Hanneder quotes this line to exemplify the moderate,
balanced view of Trika Śaiviṣm of the relationship between the Vedic and Śaiva Tantric

revelation. He writes (1998: 4):“. . . an important segment of Śaiviṣmis un-vedicin as
much as it is based on a group of scrptures, the Tantras, which are held to be superior to

the Veda. There is in fact a wide range of cults, some of which accept the Veda while

others include it as a lower and soteriologically ineffective revelation. The generally
compromising position with regard to the Veda, however nominal in nature, is perhaps

sufficient to justify the inclusion of Śaivism as a whole into ‘Hinduism’.

Abhinavagupta’s own philosophy is certainly amongst the moderate majority of Saiva
cults that would not openly contradict orthopraxy, i.e. conformity to the rules of caste,

purity and the like, but deny its efficacy in securing liberation. Such a position was
explained, for instance, by the following line of reasoning: God, in order to preserve a
functioning society, created lower scriptures that teach these behavioural rules and
supported them with the promise of reward. Proof for this is, according to
Abhinavagupta’s school, that ‘the wise men’ who propagate these rules do not

necessarily conform to them: “one should not do what they do, but do what they say.”
For Abhinava’s view of the teachings of the Veda and other ‘lower doctrines’, with

respect to his Śaivism, see below, 37/1 ff.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


bahiḥ satsv api bhāveṣu śuddhyaśuddhī
na nīlavat || 244 |
pramātṛdharma evāyaṁ cidaikyānaikyavedanāt |
Even if things did exist outside (in the outer world independently of
consciousness), purity and impurity are not (objective) as is, for example,
(the colour) blue. They are a property of the subject (pramātṛdharma) (not
the object), because (purity) is the experience of the unity of consciousness

and (impurity that of) multiplicity. (244cd-245ab)

Even if things (bhāva) are admitted to have an external nature (in the

world, outside consciousness), purity and impurity are not, like (the colour)
blue, an attribute of (some outer) thing (vastu), because they cannot change its

manifest (form) (pratibhāsa). Rather (purity and impurity are attributes) of
the perceiver. The perceiver, being more (or less) excellent according to
whether he experiences the (purity of the) oneness (or impurity of the)
multiplicity of consciousness, decides that ‘this is pure and that is impure.’
Thus, (whether something is) pure or impure is not fixed (and determined).
What is impure for one person is not so for another. If (the distinction) were to
be an attribute of (the outer) object (vastu), that this is pure and that is impure

would be fixed (and determined). (The colour) blue is not other than blue for

anyone.

Surely (one may object that) the mind of the perceiver, by seeing this
and that object (vastu) (and knowing which one is pure and which one is
impure), becomes tranquil, (and desists from enquiring into) the object of
uncertainty, (namely, as to whether it is pure or impure, as he knows from past
experience which it is), so (if all this assessment takes place with respect to the
object), how is it that purity and impurity are not an attribute of the object
(vastu)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

yadi vã vastudharmo ʻpi mātrapekṣānibandhanaḥ || 245 ||
sautrāmaṇyāṁ surā hotuḥ śuddhānyasya viparyayaḥ |
Or even if (purity and impurity) were to be a property of the object
(vastudharma), they would still be conditioned by their dependence on the

perceiver. Wine (surā) is pure for the sacrificer in the Sautrāmaṇī sacrifice,
but it is not for someone else. (245cd-246ab)

Jf ṣomething that is pure is believed to become impure, it makes no intrinsic
difference to its nature; nor is it seen to do so; we do not observe any outer change.
See below, 15/170cd-171ab and TĀv ad 29/11-13. Surā is prepared by fermenting

cooked rice or barley, then mixing it with vegetable juice, milk, and the hair of a lion, a
tiger, and a wolf. It is then purified by pouring it through a sieve, and finally, stirred

with the tail of a cow and a horse. Surā is prescribed for ritual consumption in the

sautrāmaṇi, an accessory to the vājapeya and agnicayana, both major Vedic sacrifices.
Cf. Kane, HDh 2.2:1227 ff. The Manusmṛti (11/54), Yājñavalkyasmṛti (3/227) and the

TANTRĀLOKA

Even if one accepts that purity and impurity are properties of the object,

even then they would still be conditioned by their dependence on the

perceiver. The notion of the duality (and difference between pure and impure)

that arises in relation to a particular perceiver is accepted by him, not by another
(perceiver), because it is possible that there (in his case), a notion that they are
one may arise for him, (and so it would make no difference to him whether that

same thing which is considered to be pure or impure by someone else is so or
not). In this way, what is accepted by a (certain) perceiver to be pure is pure for
him alone, not someone else. Thus, the same wine (surā) (which is otherwise

considered to be impure, when offered in) the Sautrāmaṇī is pure for ‘the

sacrificer and priest, that is, is fit to be smelt or consumed etc. This is the
meaning. (Thus it is said in that context that): ‘one should smell the wine’.
However, for someone else, who is not the sacrificer of the Sautrāmaṇī, it is on
the contrary impure, which means that (for him) it is not fit (even) to be smelt

etc. As smṛti (declares):

‘Doing violence to a Brahmin, the practice of black magic, smelling
wine and what should not be smelt, deceit and (illicit) sexual intercourse are

said to cause a person to fall from his caste status.”

Therefore, even if (purity and impurity) were to be properties of the
object, and both were not to be conditioned by their dependence on the
perceiver, then wine (for example) would either be pure or impure for

everybody (equally without distinction). Thus, one should understand in this
way that it is generally enjoined (in the Vedic scriptures) that wine is impure,
but (this general rule) is rendered invalid because particular Vedic passages
(Śruti) contradict it with regard to the sacrificer of the Sautrāmaṇī.

Surely, (an opponent may rejoin,) even if one may agree that to this

extent (at least), Vedic injunction is rendered invalid by the injunction of Śaiva

(scripture) in the aforestated manner, (but in the example you cite and many
others like it, according to you) Vedic injunction renders itself invalid, and that
does not seem to us to be logical. With this doubt in mind, he says:

anena codanānāṁ ca svavākyair api bādhanam || 246 ||
kvacit saṁdarśitaṁ brahmahatyāvidhiniṣedhavat |
Thus (Vedic) injunctions are seen in certain circumstances to be

contradicted even by their own statements (in the sense that generally
Viṣṇudharmasūtra (34) cite drinking surā as one of the five great sins (mahāpātaka),
along with killing a Brahmin, stealing (usually interpreted as stealing gold from a
Brahmin), sleeping with the teacher’s wife, and associating with anyone who commits

one of these four. See Olivelle 2005: 583, Smith 2006: 183, 234.

Read tadāpi for tad api.

Manuṣmṇṛti 11/67.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


applicable norms are subject in certain cases to exceptions). Such is the
case with the prohibitions and prescriptions regarding the killing of a
Brahmin." (246cd-247ab)
‘Their own statements’
regarding exceptions ‘in certain
circumstancesʼ with respect to the area of operation of a general (rule) ‘are
seen’ in accord with the aforestated reasoning to not be subject to any defect in
this way, as being ultimately illogical (and improper). This is what has been
explained (prakāśita). The word ‘even’ implies that (Vedic injunctions are
contradicted even by their own) statements, not just those of other scriptures.
Thus, we have not overlooked anything new by saying that a special injunction
of the Śaiva (scriptures) overrides the general (rule) of a Vedic injunction. So in
order to point out that this is not just a rare instance, rather (such cases) are
frequent (and major ones), he gives an example, (saying that) ‘such is the case
with the prohibitions and prescriptions regarding the killing of a Brahmin’.
Just as the killing of a Brahmin is generally prohibited (with the words): ‘one
should not kill a Brahmin’, it is overridden by the special Vedic passage (śruti):
‘the Brahmin should procure a Brahmin (to sacrifice)’. Such is also the case

with (the general rule that applies to the) impurity of wine. This is the meaning.
Having in this way deliberated on the subject of purity and impurity, (he
goes on) to discuss (how the same reasoning applies) to another (similar) case
also.
b) Commentary on the words: ‘there is no deliberation on what may (or may
not) be eaten or the like.”

TṚṬTRTTFĪSĀT RTTTIĪJT ŠIĪTTT: I 34. I
bhakṣyādividhayo ‘py enaṁ nyāyam āśritya carcitāḥ || 247 ||
The prescriptions regarding what may be eaten etc. have also been
considered in the light of this same principle. (247cd)
One can understand injunctions from the force of the sense of such

statements as ‘(there should be) no deliberation on what may (or may not) be

eaten (drunk, touched) or the like"' that there is (nothing) here (in this teaching

which says that this) should be eaten or (that) should not be eaten. Their
meaning amounts to (what has been explained) in accord with the same
principle (as applied to the previously quoted cases). This is the meaning.

See above, 4/230cd-232ab. According to the Indian lawbooks (dharmaśāstra),
penances for the same crime differ according to the caste of the person who commits
them. A Brahmin who kills another Brahmin is not liable to capital punishment, as
would be those who belong to castes below them. The reason given for this is that

Brahmins are inherently more pure, and so do not need to atone for a crime to the same
degree as more impure members of lower castes. So while capital punishment is
enjoined for the latter, it is forbidden in the case of the former.

" MV 18/74b quoted above 4/213d.

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask,) just as the special injunction of Śaiva (scripture)
overrides a general Vedic injunction, is a Śaiva (scriptural) injunction
(overridden) by a Vedic one in the same way or not? Taking this doubt into
consideration, he begins to explain the meaning of the (Śaiva) scriptures (with
regard to this question).

īīd a HeIT: |

sarvajñānottarādau ca bhāṣate sma maheśvaraḥ |
Maheśvara has said (the following) in the Sarvajñānottara and
elsewhere. (248ab)
(Abhinavagupta) cites that same (scripture, summarizing its purport) in
terms of its sense (arthadvāreṇa paṭhati).

ftzāgftv-vvr̥̄aṟā-u| Qc 1
3āRITTATTRT] ṬGTTTSTIT |
nararṣidevadruhiṇaviṣṇurudrādy udīritam || 248 II
uttarottaravaiśiṣṭyāt pūrvapūrvaprabādhakam |

(The instruction) uttered by men, ṛṣis, Brahmā,

u, Rudra and

others (ranges step by step from the most general) to progressively more
specific. Thus (the prescription that follows is more specific, and so)

invalidates (the more general one that) precedes it.™ (248cd-249ab)

What is uttered by men is overridden by what is uttered by ṛṣis. What is
uttered by Visṇu is (overridden) by what is uttered by Rudra. He says this (by
stating that): “(the prescription that follows is more specific, and s0)
invalidates (the more general one that) precedes it.’ This is the reason why

each subsequent (scripture) is greater (than the preceding ones). The point is

that is it sound (to maintain that) the general (rule) is overridden by the

particular (one).”

Thus, conversely, (the injunctions of lower scriptures) do not render

(those of the higher ones) invalid.

Áccordingly, he says:

? Heṛe Abhinava summarizes in his own words the purport of the passage that follows
(i.e. 248cd-251), drawn from the Sarvajñānottara. Jayaratha supplies the original text
throughout. Here he does not do so, thus confirming that these are Abhinava’s own
words.
As higher scriptures teach special cases with respect to the lower ones, they override

the lower ones, but without this entailing their loss of authority in their domains of
applicability.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


ī Jē d’ad’īaāzr̥rdá haT | Q¥2 1

na śaivaṁ vaiṣṇavair vākyair bādhanīyaṁ kadācana || 249 ||

vaiṣṇavaṁ brahmasaṁbhũtair netyādi paricarcayet |

(However, the reverse is not the case). One should not consider that

Śaiva (scripture) can ever be invalidated by the words of Vaiṣṇava
(scripture), nor the Vaiṣṇava by those (Vedic scriptures) born of Brahmā,
and so on. (249cd-250ab)
The words of the Vedas is what is meant by ‘those (scriptures) born of
Brahmā’. As Vedic (scripture) (śruri) (itself) says: “Prajāpati created the four
Vedasʼ. Vaiṣṇava (scriptures) are not invalidated by Vedic ones, so what
question could there be of the Śaiva one’s being invalidated in that case (by the
Vedic)? Thus, the point is proved. By the words ‘and so on’, one should
understand that those (scriptures) born of Brahmā are not invalidated by the
words of (the lower) gods and so on. As is said there (in the

Sarvajñānottaratantra):


The words (vākya) of the Vedic sages (ṛṣi) are not invalidated by

(those of) men, similarly, nor are those of the gods” by the Vedic sages. The

words of Brahmā are not (overridden) by those of the gods, nor are Vaiṣṇava

(scriptures) by (Brahmā) the Lotus Born One.“ And Śaiva (scriptures) are

never (overridden) by the words of Viṣṇu.’

“ From here to 251ab, Jayaratha supplies a literal citation of the passage Abhinava

paraphrases from the liṅīgoddhāraprakaraṇa of the Kriyāpāda of the Sarvajñānottara.

The passage has been traced in the Sarvajñānottara IFP transcript no. 760 of MS D
15595 deposited in the GOML, Chennai (on p. 70-71) and IFP T 334 copied from MS
D. 5550 of GOML, Chennai (p. 98). Only significant variants are noted. Cf.

Sathyanarayan 2015 intro. by Goodall p. 24-26 for edition of Sarvajñānottara 14/17-24

with translation. The first three lines — 248 to 249ab — introduce the context of the
following, drawn from the Sarvajñānottara, paraphrased by Abhinava and quoted
literally by Jayaratha up to 4/251ab. Goodall’s translation (op. cit.) of these verses
clarifies the context and explains the conclusion in the passage quoted by Jayaratha ad
4/251ab:
‘In whichever varṇa (caste) the embodied soul receives initiation, he should
remain there and constantly protect the Saiva religion (sśivadharmam). He absolutely

must perform, O Skanda, such rituals leading to liberation as are taught in the Śaiva
scripture: to transgress those (rules) would be to transgress [indeed]! This must be
considered to be the command of [the Lord who is] the Cause [of the universe]; it must

never be called into doubt. It is proven; there can be nothing that proves it, nor does
anything that disproves it exist.’ Then it continues ‘the words of the Vedic sages . . . Ṃ

etc.
RṞead with the IFP transcript daivikaṁ for vaidikaṁ and cārṣibhis for carsibhis.
% Ṟead with the IFP transcript padmajanmanā for padmajanmajaiḥ.

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely, (an opponent may ask,) what would be wrong if (scriptures)

were to be overridden in the reverse order? With this doubt in mind, he says:

aāTīd I āTTTRITS Te: TIRATĒITI Ṝ° I

bādhate yo vaiparītyāt sa mūḍhaḥ pāpabhāg bhavet || 250 ||
The fool who overrides this in the opposite order (that is, the words

of superior scriptures by those of inferior ones) is a sinner. (250cd)

‘The opposite order’ (means that) the subsequent (higher scripture) is
invalidated by the prior (lower scripture). As is said there (in the


Sarvajñānottaratantra):


“The sinner who overrides (higher scriptures with the lower ones) is a

fool devoid of sense, it is said that all (the scriptures are such that) higher ones
are progressively (more) excellent (than the preceding lower ones).”

Thus, as Śaiva scripture is in this way the most excellent of all, one

should primarily apply oneself devoutly to that (as the most important), not
elsewhere (to any other). Accordingly, he says:
Tsāī’daddaī īēh< JEAEIĒE! II |
tasmān mukhyatayā skanda lokadharmān na cācaret |
Therefore, O Skanda, one should not observe worldly
(Brahmanical) obligations (lokadharma), as (one’s) primary (practice).”

(251ab)

The point is that there is nothing wrong in observing worldly

(Brahmanical) obligations (lokadharma) secondarily (with respect to the Śaiva

ones, if one does s0) without applying oneself devoutly (exclusively to them).

(Indeed, they must be observed just) to preserve (the Brahmanical norms)

Read pāpī for pāpah. Although this reading is not supported by the transcripts,
Abhinava accepts it, and s0 it has been emended and retained.
This line reads without variants in the two IFP transcripts T 170 (p. 71) and T 334 (p.

98): yo ‘bhibādhati mūḍhātmāṣanniṣṭho mūḍhacetanaḥ | “The deluded soul who
overrides (higher scriptures with the lower ones) is devoted to what is untrue and his
mind is deluded.” Goodall’s edition (op. cit.) reads: yo hi bādhati pāpātmā sa naṣṭo
mūḍhacetasaḥ | Goodall translates: ‘The wrongful wretch who contradicts [Śiva’s
teachings], he is lost, the fool.”

The line that follows in the transcripts to which I refer is omitted by Jayaratha:

vākyānāṁ vākyavitprājñais tathā guhyaṁ hitaiṣibhiḥ | Such is the secret of the

scriptures (kept) by the wise who know the scriptures and desire what is beneficial (to
others). Goodallʼs edition of this line reads: vākyānāṁ vākyavit prājñas tathā grāhyaṁ
hitaiṣibhiḥ | He translates: ‘the wise man knows these teachings: this is how things are
to be understood by those who desire to attain what is beneficial to them.”

Cf. above 4/230 ff. and commentary.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


commonly observed in the world (loka).” That is said there (in the

Sarvajñānottara):


‘(One should not question the propriety of) the mundane (forms of)

conduct (to be observed according to one’s) caste and stage of life, and so too

the rites of expiation (when failing to do s0). One should not question the wellknown (and commonly accepted) (prasiddha) (observance of sound ritually
sustained) relationships (between family members and society) and the laws

(and cultural) norms of (a particular) region (deśadharma)." Once (having

performed all the Vedic rites of passage,) beginning with insemination up to

marriage, such is the extent of Vaidika ritual (obligation). ” Thereafter, (one

should abide) within (the norms of) the Śaiva (scriptures), and not participate in
those of others. Indeed, O Skanda, one should not observe worldly obligations
(lokadharma) as (one’s) main (and most important) activity.”


Thus it is said elsewhere:


“Read -saṁrakṣaṇārthaṁ for saṁrakṣaṇārtha.

“! This passage is edited and translated by Goodall (2015: 25-26). He observes that the

nominatives of the first line that are introduced with ye are not connected as grammar
requires by the correlative tān to what follows, which is in the accusative. He emends

saṁbandhãn to saṁbaddhãn, and so tranṣlates ‘the connected’ moral practices specific
to particular regionsʼ.
ṬFP transcript 760 read naiṣṭhikaṁ (T 334 reads vaiṣṭikaṁ) — (in the same way (if
applicable, the religious duties of)) the celibate Brahmin student’ for vaidikaṁ ‘(such is
the extent of) Vaidika (ritual (obligation))’.

Śaiva scriptures themselves insist that the rules of the Brahmanical socio-

religious order are binding on Śaiva initiates. Śaivas were subject to that order at the

time of theirinitiation, and to the extent that they chose to continue to live within it after
their initiation, they were enjoined to continue to adhere to its rules. These include, as

we read in this passage from the Sarvajñānottara, a Siddhāntāgama, that the initiate

should continue to observe the regulations of caste and the restriction of marriage, just

as they apply to the uninitiated. Indeed, prior to his initiation, he should have undergone
all the standard Brahmanical rites of transition (saṅskāra), and should ensure that they
are performed for his offspring. He should also accept all the usual restrictions on food,

and is subject to all the penances that breaking these rules impose.

Sanderson (2005: 231-232) explains that Āgamic Śaivism: ‘developed in
practice thorough accommodation of the brahminical religion that it claimed to
transcend, thus minimizing, even eliminating, the offence it gave as a tradition whose
scriptures, like those of the Buddhists, were seen to be, and claimed to be, outside the

corpus of the Vedas. These Śaivites were to accept that the brahminical tradition alone
was valid in the domain it claimed for itself and that they were bound to follow its

prescriptions and incorporate its rituals beside their own wherever applicable.
Transgressing the rules of the brahminical socio-religious system known to the Saivas as

the mundane religion (laukiko dharmah), is forbidden in a much-cited passage from the

lost Saiddhāntika Bhārgavottara:
‘So he should not transgress the practice of his
caste-class and order of life even in thought. He should remain in the order in which he

was initiated into the Śaiva religion and (at the same time) maintain the ordinances of
Śiva’” It is cited at e.g. Nareśvaraparīkṣāprakāśa ad 3/76. See also,

Mataṅgpārāmeśyara, Caryāpāda 2/2-7ab.’

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Inwardly a Kaula (i.e. Śākta), outwardly a Śaiva, and for common daily
observance, a Vaidika. One should stand firm, having drawn the essence (of the

higher scriptures), like the fruit of a coconut (tree, that protects its juice inside

by its hard shell).”

Surely (one may ask,) if one does not practice the common observances
prescribed by the Law as the primary form (of practice, then can one do so
considering them to be) an ancillary limb of the Śaiva scripture or not? With

this doubt in mind, he says:

nānyaśāstrasamuddiṣṭaṁ srotasy uktaṁ nije caret || 251 ||
One should practice what is taught in one’s own current (of

scriptures) (srotas), not what is taught in other scriptures. (251cd)

‘One should practice’ and observe what is taught (artha) in ‘one’s
own current
(srotas) (of scriptures); that is, one’s own scripture, (as where
it says,) for example: ‘one should drink wine to the fill’, and not, ignoring that

(teaching, observe) what is taught in other scriptures (that say), for example:
‘one should not drink wine’. The Lord has taught scriptures that differ from one

another according to the difference between individuals, who are (variously) fit

(for differing practices). Thus, how can something that has been taught for one
person be that which should be observed by someone else? That is said there (in
the Sarvajñānottaratantra):

‘One whose mind is fixed solely on Śiva and is engaged in pure
meditation (bhāvanā) should not recollect that which is taught in other

scriptures,”” nor (some) other deity.”

“ The same verse is quoted by Aparāditya in his commentary (‘īkā) on the
Yājñavalkyasmṛti 1/7. Sanderson (2006: 23) observes: ‘The Śaivas claimed to have

access through their Tantras to a ritual life which was higher and more potent than the
Vedic. But they were Vedic to the extent that like all Hindus of caste, they had been
purified by the Vedic rites of passage (saṁskāraḥ), from conception to investiture

(upanayanam) and (optionally) marriage. Even when they had gone through the

ceremony of initiation (dīkṣā), the Tantric rite of passage which gave them access to
Saiva ritual, they were still bound to conform to the rules of the Veda-based social
system (varṇāśramadharmaḥ) and its local variants (deśadharmaḥ). The Śaiva initiate
therefore saw himself as subject to two levels of injunction: the general or common

Vedic level and the special level reached by initiation.’ See also Sanderson 2007a: 231232.

This line is a brief paraphrase of a verse from the Sarvajñānottara quoted by
Jayaratha.
“Çf. Kulārṇavatantra 1/99c āgalāntaṁ pibed dravyaṁ,, which means the same.

“ IFP T 760 and T 334 read: na cānyaśāstroddiṣṭāṁ for nānyaśāstrasamuddiṣṭaṁ. The
meaning is the same.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Those who know the scriptures (āgama) (are of the opinion that) that
(rule) should also be applied in relation to a Tantra with the same (authority,

that is, which belongs to the same or equivalent tradition) (samānatantra),

insofar as those are also different (from one another), because the ritual
procedures (kriyā) and the rest (taught in them) differ. As they say:

‘As (the difference between) a category of Tantras (and others) is

considered to be due to the difference between the various rites etc. (they teach),

therefore what should be done is that which is taught there" (in just one of
them), and not in accord with another Tantra (of a different school).”

“ Read tasmāt tatra for tasmād yatra.

“ This verse is quoted again below in TĀv ad 8/20cd-22ab and ad 23/12cd-13ab, see
note there. It is quoted by Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha in his commentary (vṛti) on the
Mataṅgatantra ad Kriyāpāda 5/11. In place of tasmād yatra yad evoktaṁ tat kāryaṁ,

the reading there is: tasmāt tatra yathaivoktaṁ kartavyaṁ. The meaning is the same.
The context is as follows.

‘One may freely disregard the (teacher) who has introduced the procedure of

the Paddhati (liturgy) of the Svacchandatantra at this point. This is because it is proper
to supplement a scripture by drawing on another only where a procedure is not explicitly

stated [but evidently required]. In such cases, one may draw on another scripture,
because one is forced to do so by the incompleteness [of the base text]. But one may not

do so in all cases, because that would remove all consistency. This is why we have the
text ‘Tantras are distinguished from each other through their differences in the domains

of ritual (kriyā) (meditation practice (yoga) and observance (caryā)). So one must
follow the instructions of that (scripture which one has adopted) and not those of any
other system.” Moreover, even then (tatrāpi) [when one is obliged to supplement its
information from another source, one should do so] from [a scripture of] one’s own
division of the Śaiva canon, that being the closest, since it has the nature of instruction

within one and the same stream of revelation. One may not do so from another division

[such as that of the Svacchandatantra], because it is too remote from that, and because

this would lead to the undesirable consequence of the presence of practice of a contrary

nature [within Saiddhāntika Śaiviṣm]. This is why I have taught: “It is not proper in [the
practice of] one scripture to do what has been taught in another.”” Translation by
Sanderson (2003: 2-3)

also:

This is a common view. Thus we read in the Pāūrvakāmikā (kriyāpāda) 3/106

yena tantreṇa cārabdhaṁ karṣaṇādyarcanāntakam |
tena sarvaṁ prakartavyaṁ na kuryād anyatantrataḥ || ||
‘One should (perform) all (rites) beginning with attraction up to worship in

accord with the Tantra with which one has begun. It should not be done in accord with a
different Tantra.”

Again:

śaivasiddhāntatantreṇa prārabdhaṁ karṣaṇādikam ḷ
na kuryād anyaśāstreṇa kuryāc cet tantrasaṁkaraḥ ||
tantrasaṁkaradoṣeṇa rājā rāṣṭraṁ ca naśyati |

TANTRĀLOKA

However, if the need arises (to understand some detail that is not
explained in one’s own Tantra, one should draw) what is required from another

scripture, otherwise each of the things that should be done of the aggregate (of

ritual procedures) would not be fully completed.”" In this way, (it is said) in the
Mālinīvijayottaratantra (śrīpūrvaśāstra):

‘Having worshipped the Lords of the Door, there he should throw a
burning flower consecrated with (the Mantra of) the Great Weapon, having

meditated (on it), in order to pacify the obstacles.”

(The question that arises here is,) how are the Lords of the Door

worshipped? Thus, in (the case of a) need (like this, to know a ritual procedure

that has not been described, one should draw) what is required from a Tantra
with the same (authority, as is, for example, in this case) the venerable

Triśirobhairavatantra (from which we learn that):


‘(The rites of) attraction and the rest begun according to the Tantra of the

Śaivasiddhānta should not be done according to another scripture (sāstra). If that were
to be done, the (teachings of) the Tantras would be mixed up. Due to the defect of
mixing up (the teachings of the) Tantras, the king destroys (his) kingdom.” PūKā

(kriyāpāda) 3/113-114ab
! Wallis (thesis p. 110, with reference to Sanderson 2005: 98-99 and n 57) discusses
the rule of supplementation of one scripture with another that Jayaratha is applying here.

“This is the teaching that, when one’s root-text (mūlaśāstra) does not provide adequate

information for the performance of a prescribed action, then one can and maust

supplement it by turning to the other texts within the canon; first to other texts within
one’s sampradāya (samānakalpa), then (if necessary) to texts of a completely different

character (atyantāsamāna) within the canon.’ Referring in this case initially to the MV.,

he then explains that to gather all the necessary information to perform a particular
ritual, one must first turn to the Trika Triśirobhairava (samāna); then to the Mantrapīṭha
Svacchandatantra (samānakalpa),
then to the
Saiddhāntika Anantavijaya
(atyantāsamāna). ʻThe detail Jayaratha gives shows us that the tripartite hierarchy can
be understood in terms of sāmānya [general] versus viśeṣa [particular]: the Siddhānta is

the broad base of the tradition, while the Bhairava Tantras are more specialized and thus

override the rule. . . . Thus in Jayaratha’s example, one finally turns to the Saiddhāntika
texts only to supply the most trivial detail, the formation of a particular mnudrā which is

a part of the common ritual grammar of the whole tradition.’
!T MV 8/16. The printed edition of the MV reads dvārapatīn pūjya for dvārapatīn iṣṭvā.
This and the following passages describe the manner in which the worshipper should

enter the temple in which he is to worship the deity. After bathing, he should stand at

the door of the temple and worship the deities to the sides. Then, in order to purify it, he
should utter the appropriate mantra as he throws a flower into it, visualizing how the
flower is aflame with the divine energy which purifies the temple by setting it ablaze to
burn away its impurities. This procedure is called the ‘Worship of the Door”
(dvārārcana) (see below 15/183cd-191ab). It is part of external worship (bahirarcā)
described below in 15/181 ff.
! Hanneder (1998: 233) understands the adjective ‘samānatantra’ to mean ‘a common’
or ‘general’ Tantra, which is indeed another meaning of the word ‘samāna’. But here

the sense appears to be ‘the same’. Indeed, the lost 7riśirobhairava was a Trika Tantra,
as is the Mālinīvijayottara. That thīs is the correct translation is clear from the usage of

the term and cognates further ahead.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

‘Then (one should worship) at the base (of the door jamb) on the left,

Nandin, Rudra and the Gaṅgā (Jāhnavī), and on the right Mahākāla, along with
(Bhairava) the Fierce One (daṁṣṭra) and Yamunā.'
(Again,) as there is a need (to know) how one should throw a ‘burning
flowerʼ, and because how that should be thrown is not clearly defined in a
Tantra of equal authority, what is required (should be drawn) from the venerable
scripture of Svacchanda, which is like a Tantra of equal (authority, although it
belongs to a different tradition). (There we read that):

‘Having uttered Bhairava’s Weapon’! and holding a flower with pure

intent (bhāvitaḥ), having consecrated it with the Mantra (uttered) seven times

and burning with flames of fire, one should enter the middle of the (deity’s)

abode by applying the Weapon of the Arrow (nārācāstra).’'

(Well then,) how is the application of the Weapon of the Arrow (to be
done)? In the need (to know this,) because one does not perceive (any

instruction as to how that should be done) even in a scripture which is like one
of equal (authority), (one has to draw) the required (teaching) from a Siddhānta

scripture called Anantavijaya, which is of a very different (degree of

authority).”" (There we read that):

‘Having turned (one’s) hand up flat, extend the third finger and move it
along with the middle finger and thumb that adhere to it repeatedly. (Formed) in

this way, it is said to be the Arrow.”!

! This verse is quoted below in the commentary on 15/183cd-190ab, which is a

paraphrase of the entire passage of the Triśirobhairava, from which this verse is drawn.
Jayaratha is citing a very cogent example here. The worship when entering the door of a

temple or location where the rite is to be performed is basic standard procedure. The

MV refers to it very succinctly in this verse. In Chapter Fifteen, where Abhinava
expounds the procedure for daily rites, he must explain the rite of entry in sufficient
detail to be able to perform it. Accordingly, he draws the details from the
Triśirobhairava, which is a Trika Tantra. As the worship of the door is not described in

the MV, Abhinava has had to draw from this Trika scripture to make up for that
omission.
! Kṣemarāja explains in his commentary on these verses of the Śvacchandatantra that
Bhairava’s Weapon is the Weapon of the form of the Deity Without Parts (niṣkalāstra),

which is HUM PHAT.

! SVṬ 2/26-27ab.

According to Goodall (1998: xlv): ‘this is probably a quotation from the Ur-Vijaya,

the first of the Rudrabhedas in all the lists of the Siddhāntas. (That the work is closely
associated with Ananta is clear from its
‘“ādiṣūra’ gquoted in the
tantroipattivyākhyāpaṭala of the Bṛhatkālottara (Sanderson 1996b verse 41cd; NAK 1-

89, NGMPP. B

24/59

‘Kālottara’, f.

52v line 2): athānanteśvaraṁ devaṁ

sarvajñānottareśvaram | ādisūtram idaṁ taṁtre vijaye samprakīrttitam |.

! Indeed, a description of this maudrā is not found in the SVT. Kṣemarāja describes it in

just a few words, saying that ‘it is applied by impelling the index, middle finger and
thumb, casting (the arrow) into the middle of the house’ nārācāstraprayogas
tarjanīmadhyamāṅguṣṭhapreraṇāt, gṛhamadhyata iti, prakṣipann iti śeṣaḥ (SvTu ad
2/26)

TANTRĀLOKA

The fruit of our (endeavour) is the fulfilment (and end of any)

requirement (to be able to understand and apply a teaching), and (one should do)
whatever is required so that that may take place; (in that case,) there is no point
of making an issue of whether (the scripture from which one draws the required
information) is of equal or unequal (authority). If there is a need in this way, one
(should draw) what is required from another scripture, be it of equal or unequal
(authority), until the need is fulfilled. When (there is) none, there is no binding
(rule). When there is a need for the teachings of another scripture, (but) nothing
that relates to that (matter) is present (in those available), one may observe the
practice (which is essentially) meant by (one’s own scripture) (śāstrārtha)

(freely without constraint). As they say:

‘Even though it requires (something else), as long as there is a need, that
requirement itself is the authority, and so one should complete the task in
(some) other way, for if there is no other (way, it is not possible to) follow (and

complete the procedure).”

Surely (someone may ask,) the Lord has taught all these scriptures with

the intention of elevating the entire universe. (Thus) it is necessary to perform

the rites (anuṣṭhāna) taught in each one of them, so that the delusion of
transmigratory existence may be quelled. Let it be like this — what is the use of
(all) this deliberation? With this doubt in mind, he says:

āīarṁt] ā% mgraāTaāī-īaazkcŪ: I| 342 1
yato yady api devena vedādy api nirūpitam |
tathāpi kila saṅkocabhāvābhāvavikalpataḥ || 252 ||

For although the Lord has indeed uttered the Veda and the other

(scriptures) as well, even so (they are not all on the same level). This is

because (He has) conceived them in such a way that (their teachings may be

appropriate, according to whether they relate to) the contracted (state of
consciousness corresponding to the dualist point of view,) or not.
There is no dispute that the Supreme Lord Himself is the teacher of all
the scriptures, beginning with the Vedas. However, He has taught two types of
scriptures, according to whether (they relate to) the contracted state (of
consciousness) or its absence. Some are predominantly dualist and some
predominantly nondualist. The scriptures that are predominantly dualist are the
Vedas etc., and those that are predominantly nondualist are the Śaiva etc.

He says that:


TTTTṄTTT
TINS JTITHĪTGT, |

[ēzeEuttÉEĀSIE EfElEEz:ḶHIEUE


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


saṅkocatāratamyena pāśavaṁ jñānam īritam |

vikāsatāratamyena patijñānaṁ tu bādhakam || 253 ||

It is said that the knowledge of the fettered (pāśava) (and its
corresponding scriptures) accords with the degree of its contraction
(saṁkoca). The knowledge of the Lord (pati) (and His scripture) is that
which cancels (it) (hādhaka), in accord with the degree of its expansion.
(By) ‘contraction’ (is meant the dualistic) perception of difference
(bhedaprathā) (between things). The Veda etc. is this (knowledge) ‘of the
fetteredʼ, that is, of those who are in a state of bondage (pasu). (By)
‘expansion’ (is meant) the (nondualist) perception of the non-difference
(abhedaprathā) (of the eṣsential nature of things), due to the absence of
contraction. Thus, as the perception of difference is that which is to be cancelled

(bādhya), it is ‘that which cancels (it)’" Duality (bheda) is transmigratory
existence (sarsāra), and there is no disagreement that it must be brought to an
end for everybody. And (so) in this way, the observance (of the teaching)

(anuṣṭhāna) would be rendered defective by mixing up that which should be
cancelled with that which cancels it, and so what has been stated is sound. Thus

it is said elsewhere:

‘Abandoning the knowledge of the fettered, one should take refuge in
the Lord’s scripture.”
Now he explains (the meaning of the words) ‘there is neither duality nor

nonduality.

c) Commentary on the words ‘there is neither duality nor nonduality.”

idaṁ dvaitam idaṁ neti parasparaṇiṣedhataḥ |
māyīyabhedakḷrptaṁ tat syād akālpanike katham || 254 ||
(The notions that) ‘this is duality (dvaita)’ or ‘this is not (duality)’

contradict one another. Thus, they have been fashioned by the duality
”! According to Abhinava, what is taught in the Vedic traditions contracts

consciousness (nimīlana), whereas the Trika teachings lead to an expansion of
consciousness (unmīlana). This is because the Vedas are limited, ‘contracted’ scriptures
based on a dualist view of reality (bheda), whereas the Śaiva scriptures are free of

contraction and are grounded in nonduality (abheda). The contraction of nonduality

corresponds to the expansion of duality. Conversely, the contraction of duality
corresponds to the expansion of nonduality. Thus, the latter refutes and cancels out the

former.

! MV 18/74c; see above, 4/214a.

TANTRĀLOKA

(bheda) brought about by Māyā, so how can that be (possible within the
supreme principle) beyond all conception (akālpanika)?
It is said elsewhere (in other nondualist philosophies like Advaita

Vedānta that,) having set aside this inscrutable (kiṅṁīcana) duality, which is

multiplicity, one should take refuge in nonduality, that is, oneness.” ‘How can
that be (possible) in the supreme principle which is nothing but the pulsing

radiance (sphurattā) of one’s own nature and, ‘beyond conception’, that has

absorbed into itself each (of the many) aggregates of thought constructs? The

meaning is that it makes no sense (and is not proper). Thus, as (each) excludes
(the other), they contradict one another, and so (the distinction) is ‘Māyā’,

whose nature it is to conceal itself and is the power of the Supreme Goddess that
wills (all things) (icchāśakti). This ‘duality’ has come about because of that,

and (these notions of duality and nonduality) ‘have been fashioned’ by it. The
meaning is that (they are) just notions impelled (by it).
What is the (scriptural) authority (pramāṇa) here (that supports this
view)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

3h T[Tīaraāī
rHĪGhGTĪTPT |

uktaṁ bhargaśikhāyāṁ ca mṛtyukālakalādikam |
dvaitādvaitavikalpotthaṁ grasate kṛtadhīr iti || 255 ||
It is said in the Bhargaśikhā that he whose insight is (fully) formed
(kṛtadhī) devours death, time, the forces (of obscuration) (kalā) and all the
rest born of the conceived notions (vikalpa) of duality and nonduality.

“ The integral monism of Kashmiri Śaivisṃm teaches supreme nonduality

(paramadvaya), which embraces both duality and unity in the oneness of consciousness
beyond the Māyā of thought constructs that inevitably distinguishes and contrasts them.

Thus Abhinava writes:


idaṁ dvaitamidaṁ neti tadidaṁ ca dvayādvayam |
iti yatra samaṁ bhāti tadadvayamudāhṛtam ||
nanvitthamastu bhedo.api na vayaṁ śabdakāmukāḥ |
astvasau nahi no heyamādeyaṁ vā yathātra vaḥ ||
sarvānugrāhakaṁ pakṣamālilambiṣase yadi |
paramādvayadṛṣṭiṁ tatsaṁśrayeḥ śaraṇaṁ mahat ||
‘Where duality, unity and both unity and duality are equally manifest is said to
be (true) unity. To those who object that in that case diversity (bheda) must also exist,
(we say:) so be it: we do not want to speak overmuch. We neither shun nor accept
(anything) that (manifests to us) here (in this world), as you (one-sided nondualists) do.
If you wish to be supported by the view that favours all, then resort to the doctrine of
supreme nonduality, the great refuge you should adopt’ MVV 1/629-631. See
Dyczkowski 1987a: 36-38.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

Here (according to these teachings), (a true) yogi, who has attained

oneness with supreme consciousness, is he who possesses the ‘insight’, that is,
knowledge, that has attained the goal by penetrating into supreme consciousness
devoid of thought constructs. He ‘devours death, tīme, the forces of
obscuration (kalā) and all the rest’ generated by the impelling power

(anuprāṇanā) of duality (bheda) ‘born of the conceived notions of duality

and nondualityʼ, and makes them one with himself. The meaning is that there

is no notion here (in supreme consciousness) at all in the form of the object and

means of knowledge etc. and birth and death etc. As is said there (in the

Bhargaśikhātantra):


‘(The sage) then devours everything, (be it) death, time, the aggregate

of the forces (of obscuration) (kalā), all that is born of change (vikāra), the
network of notions, (as well as) oneness and multiplicity born of (unsound)

reasoning.” !

Now he comments (on the words) ‘no worship of the Liṅga or the

d) Commentary on the words: ‘there is no worship of the Liṅga or the like.”

ftzr- fēṣrqsīrṁī faamāṁqaīa< 1

siddhānte liṅgapūjoktā viśvādhvamayatāvide |
kulādiṣu niṣiddhāsau dehe viśvātmatāvide || 256 ||
iha sarvātmake kasmāt tadvidhipratiṣedhane |

The worship of the Liṅga is taught in the Siddhānta so that one may

come to know that it is made of the (whole) cosmic order (viśvādhvan).
! The same verse is quoted by Kṣemarāja in his commentary on 1) ŚSū 1/6 (which

declares: ‘when the Wheel of Energies fuses together, the universe is withdrawn’) and
2) 2/9 ((the yogi’s) food is knowledgeʼ). In the first instance, the reading is
vikārajālaṁ- ‘net of change’ for vikārajātaṁ- ‘born of change’ which is both
Jayaratha’s reading and that in the second instance also. The reading in both places in
the ŚSūvi is, pratipattisātmyaṃ ‘one in nature with perceptionsʼ for pratipattijālam
‘network of notionsʼ. Again, in the first instance the reading in the following quarter is

vikalpajātaṁ- ‘born of thought constructs’ for vitarkajātaṁ- ’born of (unsound)

reasoning, which is the reading in the second instance as it is in Jayaratha’s

commentary. Combining these variants, we get:

‘(The sage) then devours everything, (be it) death, time and the aggregate of

the forces (of obscuration) (kalā), (all that) is / born of change (vikāra) (/ the net of
change), / the network of perceptions (/ one in nature with perceptions), (as well as)
oneness and multiplicity / born of (unsound) reasoning (/ born of thought constructs).”

“MV 18/74d quoted above, 4/214b.

TANTRĀLOKA

(But) in Kula (systems) and the like, it is forbidden, so that one may come
to know that the cosmic nature of all things is within (the microcosm of) the
body. Here in (this) all-inclusive (sarvātmaka) (Trika teaching), why should

it be enjoined or prohibited? (256-257ab)

The worship of the Liṅga is enjoined ‘in the Siddhānta’, which is a
dualist philosophy, in order to know the nature of ‘the cosmic order’ consisting
of the thirty-six principles. The point is that the Supreme Lord’s Liṅga has
encompassed the entire expanding development (prapañca) of the (cosmic)
path, and so by worshiping it, this entire universe is made (to appear before the
worshiper) in a directly evident manner (sākṣātkṛta). As (the Siddhāntins) say:

‘These (worshippers) engaged in meditation (experience) pervasion
within the Liṅga up to Supreme Śiva, in (its) pedestal (pīṭha) up to Sadāśiva,

and in Brahmā’s Stone (brahmaśilā) (in its foundation) up to Māyā.”

Again:


‘When Śiva’s Liṅga has been worshipped, libation has been offered to

(the entire) universeʼ.

Again, (on the contrary,) ‘in the Kula (systems) and the like’ that
(adhere to a) nondual view, the worship of the Liṅga is prohibited, as the body
consists of the entire (cosmic) path, and so the direct vision (sākṣātkāra) of that
is easily attained there itself, and so what (beneficial) result (phala) can be had
from the outer Liṅga and the like, which is not fit (for this purpose)? As is said:
‘Worship the inner (spiritual) (adhyātamaka) Liṅga, do not worship the

outer one.”

In other words, Trika is superior to both the injunctive, prescriptive Siddhānta and
the transgressive Kula, because it accepts both views, according to circumstance. The

applicability of injunctions is not absolute and invariable. It depends upon the state of
consciousness of the practitioner. Abhinava agrees that the injunctive Siddhānta is the
Śaivism of initiates at the basic level. Higher than that are the schools that he
collectively characterizes as Kula, that rejects normative behaviour, even that of the
Śaiva ascetic (including the Kāpālika!) However, they fall short of the highest level of

nonduality. Just as oneness in metaphysical terms is not established by rejecting duality.
Itis the perfect and complete inclusion of all possible levels. The same applies to praxis.
Abhinava’s insistence on the applicability of injunctions and prohibitions implies that
any one may be applied, according to its utility for a given practitioner. At the same

time, and without contradiction, they can be transcended in the higher states of
consciousness to which Trika gives access, through empowering grace, penetration and

absorption into consciousness. This is not negation of the Brahminical moral order, it is
the affirmation of freedom to both comply and transcend.
The Liṅga, along with its pedestal, extends for the full length of the series of thirtysix principles. The Brahma Stone is underground, below the base of the Liṅga, which

fits into it. It contains the principles from Earth to Māyā. The base of the Liṅga above
ground is its pedestal (pītha), which covers the first three pure principles beyond Māyā
up to Sadāśiva. The Liṅga itself contains the following principles up to Supreme Śiva.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Again,
‘One of limited intellect, having abandoned the omnipresent, omniscient

(Lord) Who resides in (His) abode, the Cave of the Heart, bows (with

reverence) to a stone and the like, which is not (at all) worthy of veneration and
(certainly) not Śiva, with the hope that it is.’

Again here, according to the philosophy of Trika (trikadarśana), which

is supreme nonduality (paramadvaya), enjoining or prohibiting (the worship of
the outer Liṅga and the like) serves no purpose at all. So it is said that here (in
this teaching) there is no worship of the Liṅga, (but even s0,) that (practice is)

not (totally) abandoned, as” this (reality) is of the nature of all things, insofar
as one should know that this universe is the expansion of the Supreme Lord’s

supreme consciousness. And as everything is the expansion of consciousness,
(we agree that) it may also (be known by) steadfast application to the body or

otherwise. No (purpose is served) by identifying (abhimāna) with the outer

body and the like, which (identification) is an obstacle to the realisation (that
one’s own nature) is all things.” This is the point. As (Utpaladeva) says:
‘O Bhava, I salute those venerable (souls) who, without going anywhere

or abandoning any of this, see Your Abode.”

Now he talks about the collection (of ascetic practices), such as (having)
matted hair and (covering oneself) with ashes.

e) Commentary on the words: ‘(such practices of having) matted hair,
(smearing the body) with ashes and the like

yajed ādhyātmikaṁ liṅgaṁ bāhyaṁ liṅgaṁ na pūjayet | Cf. MV. 18/2cd-3:
mr̥cchailadhāturatnādibhavaṁ liṅgaṁ na pūjayet || 2 I|
yajed ādhyātmikaṁ liṅgaṁ yatra līnaṁ carãcaram |
bahirliṅgasya liṅgatvam anenādhiṣṭhitaṁ || 3 ||
‘The Yogi should not worship a Liṅga made of earth, stone, metal, gems and
the like, rather he should sacrifice to the inner (ādhyātmika) Liṅga where (the whole
universe, with all) moving and immobile things, rests. For (indeed,) the essential nature
of the outer Liṅga is empowered by this (inner Liṅga.’ MV 18/2cd-3ab is quoted in TĀv
ad 4/231cd-232ab; MV 18/3a is quoted in TĀv ad 27/1 MV 18/2cd-3 is quoted in TĀv

ad 5/121cd (120cd).

Ṛead iti yata for iti | yata.

It is possible to realise cosmic consciousness, that is, the recognition that everything

is an unfolding expansion of the consciousness which is one’s own essential divine
nature, in two ways. One is to recognise that the universe is the body of consciousness

and so experience it as one with it, as one does one’s own body with the contracted

consciousness of our egoic identity (cf. ŚSū 1/14: ‘the perceptible is (His) body.”). The
other is to leave aside all reference to body and be free of the false and binding

identification of the body with consciousness.

ŚSt20/10.

TANTRĀLOKA

fTrTāāīTṬJTTT āTaTGzāJṬTTTTJ̄ J 34 1

altĠ #ī ṁīsai gaTaTTCYI: |

niyamānupraveśena tādātmyapratipattaye || 257 ||
jatādi kaule tyāgo ʻsya sukhopāyopadeśataḥ |
(The lower Tantras prescribe having) matted hair and the like so
that by entering into (the practice of) the rules (niyama) (and adhering to
them) one may attain a state of oneness (tādātmya) (with Śiva). (Buṭ) in the
(Trika) Kaula (system), that has been abandoned, because it teaches a
means (that is easy, direct and) pleasing (sukhopāya). (257cd-258ab)

‘The rulesʼ, according to teachings such as the following, include
dispassion (vairāgya) and the like:
‘O Maheśvarī, one who has matted hair, or is clean shaven, or has a
topknot (śikhin), or carries a (sacred) staff, or is adorned with the five
insignias, and has because of (his) carelessness (of the rules indulged in)

sexual intercourse, offends me.’

‘ More commonly we come across six insignias (mudrā) worn by Śaiva (Kāpālika) and

Buddhiṣt Vajrayāna ascetics. They are the necklace (kuṇṟhikā), bracelets (rucaka),
earrings (kuṇḍala), crest jewel (Śikhāmaṇi), ashes (bhasman) and sacred thread (of
human hair) (yajñopavīta). See Dyczkowski 1988: 27.

This reference is drawn from a Kula work of the same kind as the (unpublished)
Kulapañcaśikā, that proclaims itself to be by Matsyendranātha. Indeed, this verse reads
like an abbreviated version of KuPa 3/20-21ab. Here they read:

pramādān maithunaṁ kr̥tvā mama drohī maheśvari |
KuPa 3/19 is quoted by Kṣemarāja in his commentary on Śivasūtra 3/26. The
entire passage from which both references are drawn reads:

yogavit [k: -vi] kulamārgajīñaḥ medhāvī gurupūjakaḥ [k: kuru-] |

devībhaktaḥ[k: -bhakta] suguptātmā gurur ity abhidhīyate || 17 |

yady api te trikālajāās [k, kh: -jñā] trailokyākarṣaṇe kṣamāḥ |

tathāpi samvṛtācārāḥ [k: -rā] pālayanti kulodbhūtam [k, kh: kulodbhatī] || 18 11

avyaktaliṅginaṁ [k: -taṁ] dṛṣṭvā saṁbhāsṣanti [k, kh: saṁbhāsanti] marīcayaḥ |
liṅginaṁ nopasarpanti atiguptā yataḥ [k: yata; kh: yatat] priye [k: priyet] || 19 1|
jatt muṇḍī Śśīkhī daṇḍī [k: sikhī; kh: bhasmī] mudrāpañcakabhūṣitaḥ [k, kh: -tam] |

vratacaryāsamopetaḥ [k, kh: -taṁ] yastu sevati [k,kh: sevanti] maithunam || 20 |I

vīrapānarato [kh: -ratā] devi mama drohī [k, kh: dehe] maheśvari | Kulapañcaśikā
3/17-21ab
‘A (true) teacher is said to be one who knows yoga and the Kula path and,
wise, worships (his) teacher and, devoted to the Goddess, keeps his (true) nature well
concealed (and protected). Although these (initiates) know the three times and can
aṭṭract (any being) in the three worlds, even so, they keep (their) practice hidden and
protect (the teachings) born from (their) Kula.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


‘Entry’ means practice (abhyāsa), by which one attains a state of
oneness, that is, penetration into the Supreme Lord’s nature. For that reason, the
Siddhānta enjoins (having) matted hair and (smearing) ashes (on the body) and
similar (rules), that can only be successfully (observed) with great difficulty. As
is said:
‘Parting the hairs (on one’s head) in accord with the number of

principles of obscuration, holy souls, energies and Lords of Mantra, and having

conjoined each aspect with the individual souls associated (with them), one
should ind (oneself) with Śiva’s radiant energy before the Lord of (Sacred)

Vows.”

(The yoginīs who are) the rays (of the energies of the deity), seeing (an ascetic)
without (outer) manifest insignia, converse (with him). O beloved, they do not approach

one who bears insignia, for they are very secret.

‘O Maheśvarī, one who, observing (Śaiva ascetic) vows, has matted hair (or) is
clean shaven, has a topknot (śikhin), carries a (sacred) staff, (or) is adorned with the

five insignias (of a Kāpālika), who is devoted to drinking alcohol (vīrapāna) and
indulges (in illicit) sexual intercourse, offends me.”

Quoted by Kṣemarāja in commentary on the Śivasūtra 3/26.
# Ṛead with the citation in the TĀv daṇḍī- for K: sikhī and Kh: bhasmī.
Kṣemarāja quotes another two verses from the Kulapañcaśikā in NTu ad 8/28

(vol. 1, p. 191). However, they cannot be traced in the two extant manuscripts. They are
also concerned with the maintenance of secrecy:
yan nāsti sarvalokasya tad astīti virudhyate

nigadyate yadā devi hṛdaye na prarohati l

etasmāt kāraṇād devi devatābhiḥ pragopitam |
tena siddhena deveśi kiṁ na siddhyati bhūtale ||
‘It is a contradiction (to maintain that) what does not exist in all the world does
exist. O goddess, if one voices that (view), it does not grow in the heart. O goddess, for
that reason it has been concealed by the deities. O queen of the gods, when that has been

accomplished, what has not been accomplished on the surface of the earth?”
“ As Jayaratha just referred to the Siddhānta as teaching such things, it is safe to
assume that the verse Jayaratha is quoting here and the following are drawn from a

Siddhāntāgama. Such practices would be considered in the Siddhāntas to be caryā.
Caryā is a difficult term to translate in one or two words in English. It means something
like ‘behaviour’ or ‘conduct’. It is not just a particular practice or rite, caryā is a way of
referring as a whole to the observances and way of life ofa Śaivite. Under this heading

come, for example, various kinds of ‘vows’ (vrata) that are observed for certain periods
of time or may even be lifelong. They involve, for example, living the wandering
ascetic’s life. This often requires smearing one’s body with ashes, keeping matted hair,

wearing waistbands or other sectarian signs, and the like. Such vows and other forms of
caryā are traditionally described in one of the (ideally) four sections (pāda) of the
Siddhāntāgama that draws its name from it. For definitions, examples and discussion,

see Dyczkowski 2009 intro. 1, p. 508-512. Concerning the contents of a typical
caryāpāda, see introduction to the edition of the Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama p. 138-141.

An example is Rudravrata. This is described in the MTPā (caryāpāda 9/5-21ab) in a
paṣssage that begins:

TANTRĀLOKA


Moreover:

‘Those who observe vows, have matted hair (or) shaved heads, and

foremost amongst them, are white with ashes, adorned with sectarian marks on
their forehead (tilaka, puṇḍraka), and (fine) turbans (or shawls) (parta), are like

kings.”

Whereas matted hair, ashes and the like ‘ʻhas been abandoned’, that is,

forbidden ‘in the Kaula (systems)’, that is, in a Kula system (kuladarśana).


This is the meaning. As is said (in Kula scripture):

‘One should not associate, whether through deed, mind or speech, with
anyone who (here) on the surface of the earth bears the (outer) marks (chinna)
(of his ascetic practice, such as) matted hair, ashes and the rest, the flag (which

is the insignia of his order), (the outer signs of the observance), the Vow (vrata)

of the Skull-bearer, the spear, and the very terrible ascetic’s staff

‘Permitted by (his) teacher (to observe the vow), smeared with ashes, not

accepting (gifts from others), observing silence, holding a trident, always eating (only

what he has received) as alms and content, he should repeat mantra. Next to a solitary

Liṅga, in a cremation ground or under a tree, self-controlled and established in

concentration, he should observe the vow at night. Wearing (just) a single piece of cloth
or naked, having conquered anger and helpful (to others), the wise man fills the earth at

all times with (his) discernment and having done so lives quietly. Then placing ash
thereon and generating (in himself) by (the right application of) reason (yukti) a true
aversion for the world, with an ever pure heart and full attention, he contemplates
(Sadāśiva). MTPā (caryāpāda 9/5-14). For the full passage see Dyczkowski 2009 intro
vol. 1, p. 511. For a discussion on the nature of caryā and Śaiva vrata and its types see
ibid.

508-528.

“ Read bhūmipā yathā for bhūmipādayaḥ.
Concerning the term ‘darśana’ in the sense of ‘teaching’ or ‘system’ rather than just
‘philosophy, as is its more common and better-known meaning, see Dyczkowski 2009

intro. vol. 2, pp. 329 ff. It appears that the term ‘Kula’ denotes Matsyendra’s reformed
Kauḻism that Jayaratha refers to here as the ‘kuladarśana’. The term ‘Kula’ on the other

hand denotes the form of Kaulism that is still embedded in the Bhairavatantras or has

developed independent Tantras centred on the Goddess of that Kula. Thus we have, for
example, a Kālīkula, a Śrīkula and, indeed, Trikakula. The Kaulism taught in the works

attributed to Matsyendranātha such as the Kulapañcāśika mentioned above or the
Kaulajñānanirṃṇaya are focused on the abstract principles of Kula and Akula, rather than
a specific Goddess. We do indeed find a detailed description of the worship of the inner
Liṅga in the Kaulajñānanirṇaya attributed to Matsyendranātha.

“ The word ‘ṣūla’, that I translate as ‘trident’, literally means ‘spear” or ‘lance’.
d Vows such as this came to be totally internalised. More than just integrated into

symbolic ritual implements and actions, they came to be seen as most authentically
observed by inner yogic practice, and thus domesticated. We find a good example in the
Śivasūtra, where it says, ‘the activity of the body is the vow’ (3/26). Bhāskara
understands the ‘vow’ to be the Great Vow (mahāvrata) of the Kāpālika. The five

insignia of those who observe it are the ascetic’s staff, ashes, ashes, sacred thread,
banner and ornaments. He explains the inner practice of the Great Vow as follows:


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


As that is so here in this case (according to the Trika Kaula view):


‘The All-pervasive Lord (vibhu) Himself blossoms forth wherever the
rays (of the senses) unite (within consciousness when making contact with their

objects).”

Such statements impart the teaching concerning ‘the means that is
pleasing’, in order to realise the Supreme Lord’s nature easily without effort,

even when (immersed) in a (pleasing) contact with the objects of the senses.


As is taught (in the Svabodhodayamañjarī):

‘(The teachers who came) before taught (how to bring about) the
cessation (of the activity of the senses and mind) (nirodha) by (repeated)
practice and dispassion (vairāgya). (But) we teach that this cessation (comes

about) effortlessly (by desisting from effort).

‘(This yogi) performs the Great Vow of abiding in his own unfettered nature.
(His) five insignia (mudrā) are the body, that is, the skeleton, the skull, the anklets, the

backbone, which represents the staff, and the bones, that are those of the hands, feet and

neck. The ashes (he smears on his body) are the supreme radiance (of consciousness),
and the three qualities (guṇa), the sacred thread. His banner is the Great Path and his

ornaments, the senses. His sport is to play amongst the objects of the senses, and he

delights constantly in the cremation ground of the heart (of consciousness) illumined in

his body, speech and mind. Whatever he does is the eternal festival of the Lord of
Heroes.”
Abhinava,

followed

by

Jayaratha,

takes

us

to the

next

interiorization to reflective awareness of sensorial and cognitive functions.

level,

from

“ This line is also quoted above in the commentary on 1/4. See there for details. The
second line of this verse declares: “For those who possess that same Being and who do
not (need to) take the support of rules and regulation (niyama), (all) talk of meditation
and (outer) worship is a deceit.”

Kṣemarāja uses the term ‘sukhopāya’ — ‘the means that is pleasing’ twice in his PrHrṛ.

In the first instance (commenting on the first aphorism), he explains it by quoting the
VBh (verse 106), where it says that:
‘The perception of subject and object is common to all embodied beings. What
is special about yogis is that they pay attention to the relationship (between them)’.
Clearly, the pleasing or easy means in the technical sense here means the

cultivation of this attention, that is, to oneself as the perceiver engaged in the perception

of an object. This requires shifting the normal focus of attention away from the
particular thing that is perceived, coupled with a strengthened sense of self-awareness.
Further ahead, commenting on the eighteenth aphorism, Kṣemarāja supplies more
details of this practice. He writes: ‘there is an easy means by which one can shatter all
the fetters of rigorous (yogic) disciplines . . . The aspirant keeps his mind (citta)
concentrated on (the consciousness which is) the Heart, restraining, in the aforestated
manner, the thoughts (vikalpa) that prevent his abiding in his own true nature by not

thinking of anything at all, and so lays hold of the state free of thought (avikalpa). (With

practice,) he becomes used to regarding his consciousness (cir) as the real perceiver,
untarnished by the body etc., and so within a short time, he achieves absorption in the
unfolding Fourth State (turya) (of consciousness) and the one Beyond the Fourth
(turyātīta).’ For these states, see below, note 5,260.

‘ The Sanskrit here is ayatnena, which could be translated simply as ‘effortlesslyʼ. I

have translated according to what appears to be the intended sense. From this point of

TANTRĀLOKA

Again, (the words ‘it is neither (accepted nor)) rejected’ etc. have not
been explained separately, because the sense is included in what is meant (here).
The point is that this is the sense (artha) expressed in the first and last part (of
this verse). Here (in this Trika Kaula teaching), on the contrary, that is (neither)

enjoined (nor) prohibited, as (everything is) of the nature of all things. This is
the relation with (what was said) previously. Here, (according to the Trika

teaching, the goal) to be achieved is oneness with consciousness. There, (for
that,) one should take up whatever (practice) at whatever time is close (to that

view, consciousness is restricted due to the effort and exertion. In other words, freedom
is attained by ‘letting go’, that is, participating in the immediacy of ‘being here now’.
The idea is that a method of realizing one’s identity with Deity is taught here that can be

achieved without effort, even when one is immersed in the experience of the objects of

sense.

“N Syabodhadayamañjarī by Vāmanadatta (alias Vīranātha) v. 12. The second line in

Torella’s edition (see above, note to TĀv ad 3/4) is essentially the same as quoted here,
only the word order differs. There we find: ayatnena nirodho ‘yam asmabhir upadiśyate
| for asmabhiṣ tu nirodho ‘yam ayamenopadiśyate | Torella (2000: 404 note 138) points
out that Vāmanadatta is referring here to Yogasūtra 1/12: abhyāsavairāgyābhyāṁ

tannirodhaḥ — ‘lts cessation (is brought about) by (repeated) practice and dispassion.”

Also BhGī 6/37cd ‘0 Kaunteya, it is grasped by practice and dispassion.’ Abhinava
explains in his commentary
the Bhagavadgītārthasaṁgraha — on this line that ‘by
dispassion enthusiasm for the objects of sense is destroyed. By practice the matters to do
with liberation (mokṣapakṣa) are gradually made the object of experience.’ Torella

points out that Śivopādhyāya, commenting on VBh 129, says (pp. 112-113) that the

practice it teaches is in accord with this one. The meditative practice (dhāraṇā) there is:
‘wherever the mind moves, having by that (very mind) immediately abandoned
whatever (it moves to), it has no fixed place and so, (left without support), one becomes
free of (its) fluctuations.”

Torella (2000: 389) cogently quotes Abhinavagupta’s MVV (2/106-112),

where he explains the practice here, and even quite possibly refers to Vāmanadatta, the

author, as the Master, and this work. There we read:

‘In actual fact, no limb of yoga can serve as a means (to realise Anuttara).
(Anuttara’s) own form is without form, because it is devoid of limitations. The means
(to attainment) is No Means (anupāya), since neither ritual procedures nor suppression
(of mental) states (are required to attain a liberated state of consciousness). This ship (of
the subtle body), devoid of exhalations and inhalations, (is impelled naturally) by a
(pleasingly) conducive breeze (anuvāta) (which follows after the cessation of the

breath). In this way it conveys the Self across the ocean of duality, even though the

mind is immersing (itself) in the juice (of the aesthetic delight) (rasa) of the objects of
sense, like a gaud without holes that has not become wet inside (when floating on
water). The same happens to those who restrain (the natural course of) the mind; like a
horse that is subject to (many) restrictions is, for that reason, running (here and there)

taking innumerable wrong directions. Why does that happen? It is well known that the
mind may delight even in pain; on the contrary, it may even turn away in disgust from

pleasure or knowledge. This is precisely what the Master (Vāmanadatta?) has taught in
his treatise (the Subodhamañjarī?), in many ways. The activities (vṛtti) of the senses
dissolve away solely by indifference (to their objects) and detachment (from them)

(anādaravīraktyā). They rebel to the degree in which they are disciplined (and

restrained).


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


oneness); (everything) else should be abandoned.”" Thus, what purpose does the
injunction or prohibition to (have) matted hair and the rest serve for us? As he
will say:

‘When and wherever (in any given circumstance) one knows the means
to enter the supreme principle, which is close (to it and most conducive), then
that should be adopted; (every other) should be abandoned.
Now he comments (on the words), ‘the observance or otherwise of (an
ascetic’s) Vows and the likeʼ.
f) Commentary on the words: ‘the observance or otherwise of (an ascetic’s)
Vows and the like’

vratacaryā ca mantrārthatādātmyapratipattaye || 258 |I
tanniṣedhas tu mantrārthasārvātmyapratipattaye |
Moreover (the Siddhāntas prescribe) the observance of (ascetic)
vows (vratacaryā) in order to achieve a state of identity (tādātmya) with (the
deity, which is) the reality (artha) denoted by (one’s) Mantra. (But) that
# Consciousness is one, and as it is all things, injunctions or prohibitions have nothing
to do with it. Oneness with it is the goal, so whatever is near to that state should be
adopted, while what is far from consciousness should be avoided.

““ Below, 4/273.

“” We have noted that numerous (mimetic) yows (vrata) Śaiva adepts (sādhaka) can
undertake are described in Śaiva scriptures. These Vows basically involve assuming the

lifestyle and garb of a wandering Śaiva ascetic, who seeks to imitate in this way the

deity he invokes by the continuous repetition of the mantra of which it is the ultimate
reality and meaning (artha). The Vow of Knowledge (vidyāvrata) is a common
example, discussed in Dyczkowski 2009: intro. 1, p. 517-528 and intro. 3, p. 234-236.
This practice and the others mentioned in the following verses are basic to the praxis of
the theistic Kula variety of Tantras. They are centred on the worship of specific
goddesses, notably forms of Kālī and Kubjikā (not yet Tripurā at this early stage). We

have noted that Matsyendranātha reformed these practices by internalizing them and
removing a specific referent to a particular goddess (see above, note 4,933). The two
typologies continued to develop well into the later period, that is, after the 11" century.

The Kaulism of the Anuttaratrikakula takes a middle way. Outer worship, with its
deities, is predominantly dualistic. Internalized worship, predominantly centred on the

universal and formless aspect of consciousness, is dominantly nondualist. The Supreme

Nondualism of the Trika is inclusive. It does not establish its nondualism by rejecting
dualism, rather by encompassing both in the plenitude (piūrṇatā) of consciousness. For
the same reason, Trika does not reject outer worship, although it gives preference to the
inner form. Thus, from this perspective, we can say that there is a progression from
deistic Kula to a more absolutist Kula, to finally reach the (integralist) Trikakaula. This

is indeed how they are sometimes arranged, in terms of a graded hierarchy of initiations,
from lower to higher. This is how it is, for example, in the Niśācāra, quoted above in

TANTRĀLOKA

is prohibited (by the Kula Tantras), so one may (come to) realize the
universal nature (sārvātmya) of (the deity, that is the) reality denoted by

Mantra (mantrārtha). (258cd-259ab)

One should carry over (from previous verses) that (the observance of

vows) is taught in the Siddhānta because (this is indicated by the use) of the
word ‘and’. ‘The reality (artha) denoted by a Mantra’ is the (specific) fixed

deity and the like that it denotes (vācya). ‘It is prohibited’ in the Kaula
(teachings).

‘The universal nature (of the reality denoted by (every)

Mantra) is at one with all things. Here, (in this Trika teaching,) that

(observance) is neither prohibited nor enjoined. All this has been explained

before, and so (there is no need to) exert (oneself) again (to do so here).
Now in order to explain (the words) ‘entry into the sacred meeting
grounds (kṣetra) etc.’, he says:

g) Commentary on the words: ‘entry into the sacred meeting grounds (kṣetra)
etc.ʼ

TtT2TTTS
TTĪ fJ-TATTS || 2U. I
H-ĪṬTTT-PTĀIJ Tāc-THTTĪTĪCYJT

kṣetrapīṭhopapīṭheṣu praveśo vighnaśāntaye || 259 ||

mantrādyārādhakasyātha tallābhāyopadiśyate |

Entry (praveśa) into the sacred meeting grounds (kṣetra) and the
sacred seats, both primary (pītha) and secondary (upapīṭha), is taught (in
Kula Tantras) in order to quell obstacles (to the success of one’s practice).

Now, in the case of one who propitiates (a particular) Mantra (deity) and
the like, (residence in such places) is taught (as a means), in order to attain

that (mastery through it and the benefits it bestows). (259cd-260ab)

TĀv ad 1/18 and below by Abhinava himself in 13/300cd-302. Sometimes Kula and
Kaula are treated under a common heading as Kaula.

Above, 4/216a.

Veḍic religion and culture was almost exclusively for householders. Even so,

provisions existed for householders to take a vow for a period of time to go and live and

wander in the forest, away from the comforts and security of their village. Thus, a model
was established that continued to be operational when Śaiva ascetic traditions came to
develop. The first clearly documented ones were the Pāśupatas, who worshipped Rudra
as Paśupati, the Lord of the Creatures. Uttering Vedic Mantras dedicated to him, they
observed the Great Vow (mahāvrata). They certainly already existed in the first century
CE and may well have had precursors some two or three centuries before, if not more.
In their wanderings, Pāśupata ascetics established and discovered Liṅgas, their main

external object of worship. Their spiritual power and wisdom won them the patronage of
local rulers and potentates, and thus contributed substantially to the spread of Śaivism in

the Indian subcontinent. By the time the Tantras began to be redacted in a substantial
way, probably around the sixth or seven century CE, monasteries (maṭha) had been

established and the development of a sacred geography was underway.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

A ‘sacred meeting ground’ (kṣetra) is a place where (Siddhas and

Yoginīs) meet (melāpasthāna). (The primary) ‘sacred seats’ are Kāmarūpa and

the rest. The secondary sacred seats are Devīkotṭṭa and the rest. (Entry into these

sacred places is prescribed) ‘so that (he who propitiates Mantras) can attain’
the accomplishments (siddhi) etc. of his Mantras etc. by the rite (krama) of
Pleasing Union (with the Yoginī) (priyamelāpa) and the likē or the means
(nimitta) of that. As is said: “By taking refuge in the sacred meeting grounds,
primary and secondary, and other sacred places (saṁdoha) one becomes pure.’

(Now) he says that this (practice) is prohibited elsewhere (in other

traditions), as well as here (in this one).

īcrīTā-ār.ratarīzg aīaṝatiī I| 3ēo l

aflīāq 1

Sacred places are sites where divine beings reside and sacred events have taken
place. Pilgriīmage and sacred place is a major feature of all forms of Indian religion,
indeed, it is of the whole of Asia. Apart from Agni, the god of fire, the deities of the

Vedas reside in the heavens, coming down to earth when they are invoked in the Vedic

sacrifices to receive food offerings made to them in the sacred fires, which are the
primary focus of the rites. On the contrary, these other beings, who nowadays populate
in immense numbers villages, towns, cities and the countryside throughout India, live
down here in the world of men. Local, largely non-literate traditions concerning them
are also very many and variously extensive. In the Sanskrit sources, many such

locations are recorded in the Purāṇas and in the Epics, in which the mythology, legends

and epic events associated with the cults of the deities and beings who reside or have

been there are described. Pilgrimage to the most famous amongst them is still a major
feature of modern Hinduism. This is performed by both householders and ascetics.

Parallel to the sacred sites recorded in the Purāṇas, and sometimes coinciding with
them, are those enumerated in the Tantras. One can trace to some extent the
development of references to such places in the Bhairava Tantras of various schools,
beginning with relatively random and unsystematic ones, to the formation of standard
groupings. These are called, for example, ‘pīṟhas’ ‘sacred seats’, ‘kṣetras’ ‘sacred

fields’ and ‘saṁdohas’ ‘sacred meeting grounds’, of which there are also ‘secondary’

(upa-) varieties. Quite probably they were originally geographical sites visited regularly
by wandering ascetics (rather than householders). Kaulas who did so are said in the

Tantras to meet Yoginīs there, along with whom they worshipped and had ritual
intercourse. Fairly early on, these sites came to be projected into maṇḍalas and the

worshipper's body, where they are worshipped. Here, as elsewhere, Abhinava presents

them and pilgrimage to them as only a means of acquiring yogic accomplishments
(siddhi) by the assiduous recitation of mantras there.
Concerning the sacred meeting grounds where Siddhas and Yoginīs meet
(melāpasthāna), see below, 28/372ab-373cd (28/371-373ab), and concerning the
primary and secondary sacred seats and other sacred sites, see below, 15/80 ff. and
29/59-63. The location of these places and the practice of pilgrimage to them, probably

initially external and then internalized, is discussed in Dyczkowski 2004: chapter 4 —
‘The Inner Pilgrimage of the Tantras’, and in more detail in Dyczkowski 2009:
Introduction, chapter 3 — ‘Sacred Place and Inner Space’.

“ Read siddhyāder for siddhāder.

“% There are two types of ritual union that may take place between a Siddha and a
Yoginī — ‘pleasing’ (priya) and ‘forceful” (haṭha). See above, note to comm. on 4/57cd-

58 and below 28/372ab-373cd (28/371-373ab).

TANTRĀLOKA

kṣetrādigamanābhāvavidhis tu svātmanas tathā || 260 ||
vaiśvarūpyeṇa pūrṇatvaṁ jñātum ity api varṇitam |
(However, in the Matatantras,) travel to the sacred meeting
grounds (kṣetra) and other (such places) is prohibited, so that (one may)
realize the (perfect all-embracing) plenitude (pūrṇatva) of one’s own
nature as being the nature of all things, and so this too has been
explained (in the same way). (260cd-261ab)
By the words ‘other (such places), are included the sacred seats

(pītha) and the rest. ‘In the same wayʼ, that is, in the aforestated way. That is
said (in the following verse):
‘From this, nothing can be removed nor can anything at all be added

here to it. As the Self is completely full (and contains all things), what is the use

of wandering around (in pilgrimage) to the sacred meeting grounds and other
(such places)?”

Again, as stated before, both (prohibitions and injunctions) are absent
here (in Trika doctrine), and so he says, ‘this too has been explained (in the
same way). That was said (before, where we read with regard to the worship of
the Liṅga):
‘Here (according to the nondual Trika teaching), that (is concerned with
the all-inclusive) nature of all things, why should (anything) be enjoined or

prohibited?

Now he explains (the words) ‘the observance of the Rule etc.”.

h) Commentary on the words ‘the observance of the Rule (samaya) etc.’

TTTTIINĀTa TTGTTŪĪĪTTTRYAT I QēĒA I

grarṝēfTīezq ā’TaīJ eaīT J| 22 1|

samayācārasadbhāvaḥ pālyatvenopadiśyate || 261 |I
bhedaprāṇatayā tattattyāgāt tattvaviśuddhaye |
samayādiniṣedhas tu mataśāstreṣu kathyate || 262 ||
nirmaryādaṁ svasaṁbodhaṁ saṁpũrṇaṁ buddhyatām iti |

“ See above, note 4,831 concerning the distinction between Kula Tantras that are
injunctive and Kaula/Mata ones that are not.

“ Abhinava says the same below in 15/81cd-82ab.
“. Above, 4/257ab.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

It is taught (generally in the Śaiva scriptures) that the essence of the

observance of the Rule (samayācāra) should be maintained (once one has
received initiation). (However, the observance of) the Rule and the rest is

prohibited in the Mata scriptures.” This is because (the gradual)

abandonment of this and that, so that the principles (which constitute the

microcosmic and macrocosmic order) may be purified, derives its existence
from relative distinctions (bhedaprāṇatayā). (But these scriptures declare
that knowing this,) ‘one should realize one’s own consciousness to be
(perfect and) all-embracing in all respects (saṁpūrṇa) and unconfined (by
such rules and regulations) (nirmaryāda).’ (261cd-263ab)

‘The observance of the Rule’ consists of ‘this should be done and that
should not be doneʼ. ‘It derives its existence from relative distinctions’,
which consist of having abandoned something, something else is taken up as,

Once initiation has been imparted, the initiate is told the rules (samaya) he should
observe. Examples of such rules, listed in eight groups of eight drawn from the
Devyāyāmalatantra, are recorded below in 15/525cd-535ab (521cd-531ab).

“ Cf. below 15/156cd-157ab, 169cd-170ab. It is not clear what these Mata scriptures
are. The SYM, as Gnoli believes, is not one of them, for it supplies a set of such rules
(samaya) (SYM 6/45 ff.). Below, a few verses further ahead, Abhinava explains that the

reason for this rejection in the ‘Mata scripturesʼ is that rules, even Kula ones, entail

accepting the duality between what should be adopted or abandoned, which is not
compatible with the oneness of supreme reality (4/269cd-270ab). Thus, Abhinava
considers the Mata scriptures (like the Mālinīvijaya) that set these rules aside to be
higher than Kaula ones. If, as Sanderson suggests, the esoteric system of the Mata is
related to the doctrine of the Trika Kaula Parātrīśikā, then clearly Abhinava considers

the Trika of the MV to be more elevated than it is, because, as he says, it neither rejects

nor accepts this ruling. As he puts it, even if such observances are maintained, or

indeed, even rituals are performed, they cannot break up the unity of the highest reality

(kṛtaṁ vā khaṇḍaṇāya no 29/8d). Rituals are unnecessary, but excess in this case, is not
a defect (ādhikaṁ na doṣayate). The Mata scriptures, Abhinava himself tells us here, are

all those that reject the restrictions of rules and regulations. This is because they teach
the transmission of direct, immediate realization to those who are fit to receive it. They
are, in other words, the higher Kaula scriptures. Kula systems do prescribe rules to
follow, but stress that they are not universally applicable. They are relative, in the sense
that they apply according to circumstance and the condition of the individual

practitioner, ritual requirements etc. Mata/Kaula scriptures however deny their validity
and applicability absolutely. Effectively, they preach the liberated state in this life, in

which the soul is completely unconditioned and free of any restrictions. This applies to
those who are immersed in their own nirvikalpa consciousness, having risen to it by the
removal of vikalpa by their assimilation into the former. Accordingly, Abhinava,
dealing with this matter in the context of Śāktopāya, extends it in this way to the

attainment of the complete plenitude (pūrṇatā) of identity with Bhairava, who obviously

is not bound by any rule or regulation. Abhinava envisages this process as one through
levels or degrees of obligation to observance. This begins with the Siddhānta and the

maintenance of one scripture as the prime authority, through to the Kula practices, and
beyond into the scriptures and teachings of Kaula/Mata, which is sukhopāya. This is

presented by Abhinava as the hallmark of Anuttara Trika, which embraces the

Pratyabhijñā, that teaches this par excellence. In this he is followed by Kṣemarāja in his
Pratyabhijñāhr̥daya; see above note 4,937.

TANTRĀLOKA

for example, by abandoning other scriptures, (one) progresses in (the teaching
of) one’s own scriptures. As he will say:
‘He on whom Mantra has not been deposited should not sit (to take part

in the rites). Nor should he resort to other scriptures. Knowledge which is not

fully developed may vacillateʼ by reflecting (bhāvana) on (scriptures) other
(than one’s own).”

However, ‘the observance of the Rule and the rest is prohibited in
the Mata scripturesʼ, which (in some aspects are) the same (and at the same
level as our own, and in others) differ. And he says that that (is the view) in that

book (with the words) ‘unconfined° etc. That is the supreme reality, namely,
‘one’s own consciousnessʼ, which is self-luminous (svaprakāśa), and so,

because it is not dependent on anything else, it is ‘(perfect and) all-embracing
in all respectsʼ, and so because it is unconditioned (aniyata) by nature, it is
‘unconfined’ and not restricted (by rules and regulations). The meaning is that
(this is what) ‘one should realize’ and experience (for oneself). The point is,
how can the observance of the Rule, which is associated with thousands of
requirements to give up (this) and take up (that) etc., serve as a means to

(attaining a state of) purity within the supreme principle which is like this?

Now he wishes to explain (the words) ‘one’s own and others’ icons

(rūpa), sectarian insignia (liṅga), (initīatory) names and clans (gotra) or the

like So, in due order, he (first) explains what is meant by ‘one’s own’ and
‘othersʼʼ form.
i) Commentary on the words ‘one’s own and others’ icons (rūpa), sectarian

insignia (liṅga), (initiatory) names and clans (gotra) or the like’

“ Correct kampet etara- to kaṃped etara-.

“ Below, 15/570cd-571ab (566cd-567ab).
The word ‘nirmaryāda’ (which I translate as ‘unconfined') literally means ‘without
bordersʼ or ‘set limits'. Ethical norms set limits on one’s behaviour, which should not be
transgressed. Consciousness is ‘unconfined’ in the sense that it is not bound by the
restrictions of rules and regulations. There is nothing that consciousness has to do or
desist from. It is not conditioned (niyata) by the law of Karma, that dictates that every
action has its own consequences. This does not mean that Śiva consciousness is

‘immoralʼ; rather, that it is beyond the dictates of any moral code or rules. They should
be followed when Śiva consciousness has not been realised. The point is that true

spiritual development is not measured by the number of rules and restrictions one

observes. What is essential is to develop and maintain an awakened awareness of
consciousness as Śiva’s sacred infinite nature. The observance of rules requires
abandoning some things which are not conducive to achieving a state of purity, or

assuming others that are. The purpose of this is finally to attain and maintain the perfect
purity of Deity itself, and hence be as It is. The Mata Tantras point out that this practice

is necessarily attended by the dualistic perspective of relative distinctions, that can never
be shaken off. The only way to attain the goal is to awaken to one’s own true essential
consciousness nature, which is perfect and all-embracing just as it is. In brief — one
should focus one’s attention on consciousness, not just on the observance of rules.

“ Above, 4/216cd.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


frīq
ē| 2ē3 1

fiīq 1
parakīyam idaṁ rūpaṁ dhyeyam etat tu me nijam || 263 ||
jvālādiliṅgaṁ cānyasya kapālādi tu me nijam |
(Similarly, members of a Kuḻa and others distinguish between their
own deities and those of others, reflecting that) “that (iconic) form (rāpa)
belongs to another (school), whereas this is my own, upon which I should

meditate.” “A trident” and the like (are the) sectarian marks (liṅga) of a

different (tradition), whereas the skull and the like are (those of) my own.”
(263cd-264ab)

‘This’ is the meditator (dhyātṛ). ‘The trident and the rest° (are the

sectarian marks of) another (school), because they arise due to the desire (to
make a show of) outer (things) and the like. ‘My own’ (sectarian mark is the

Skull and the like), which is located in my own body.

(Now) he explains the meaning of the words ‘and the rest’, (of the

expression) ‘(bearing sectarian) marks (liṅga) and the rest’.

ādiśabdāt tapaścaryāvelātithyādi kathyate || 264 |

The expression (in the Mālinīvijayottara) ‘and the rest (refers to
other similar matters that set its teaching apart from that of others, such as
the practice of) austerity (tapas), observances (caryā), (auspicious) times of
the day (velā), the lunar days (when special rites are performed) and so

forth (that vary in differing schools and so are all rejected as relative).

(264cd)

‘Austerity’ (includes penances such as) the Cāndrāyaṇa.” (By)

‘observancesʼ (is meant the Śaiva observance of) right conduct (ācāra) taught

’ Sanderson suggests the reading sūlādi liṅgaṁ for jvālādiliigaṁ. The reason he gives

is that ‘there is no evidence that a flame was ever a iḷ, insignium and because it is in
any case implausible that it would have been, since the insignia in question are attributes

carried by ascetics that enable those who see them to identify the tradition to which they
belong.” Sanderson 2005b 120 n. 77.

“ Read śūlādi for jvālādi.

‘ Clearly, Jayaratha has understood these lines differently. He reads them to mean that
the difference between lower order Śaivites and others of one’s own kind is that the
former carry outer insignia, whereas the others do not, taking inner parts of the body
(like the skull) to be their insignium.

The cāndrāyaṇa is a fast which is regulated by the lunar cycle. The food one eats is
decreased every day by one mouthful for the dark fortnight and increased in like manner
during the bright fortnight (see MS 6/20.

TANTRĀLOKA

in the section of the Āgamas dealing with that (caryāpāda). ‘(Auspicious)

times of the day° (are when one should bathe or perform rites, as) for example,

midday and midnight. ‘The lumar dayʼ is the first day of the lunar fortnight
(pratipada) and the rest.

ṃa r-aī |
nāma śaktiśivādyantam etasya mama nānyathā |
The (initiatory) name of this (other kind of Śaivite initiate who

belongs to the Śaiva Siddhānta) ends in ‘Śiva’, ‘Śakti’ and the like (which
varies according to the initiate’s caste and gender), whereas our (initiatory
names) are not the same (and given without such considerations). (265ab)

The (initiatory name) ‘of this’ adept (sādhaka) of Siddhānta (Śaiviṣm)
that is (is given to him) when he takes up (the observance of a) vow or the like
and is determined by (the standard) procedure of casting a flower and so on,

may end with ‘Śiva’, ‘Śakti’ and the like’. Thus (examples) are Śikhāśakti and

Īśānaśiva. (The expression) ‘and the like’ (refers to names that end) in ‘Gaṇa’

etc. as, for example, Kavacagaṇa. That is said (in the following verse):

‘One should cast a garland (into a diagram of names). The name of

twice born initiates begins with that and ends with ‘Śiva’. The one for those
who are not (twice born) it ends with ‘Gaṇa’.’
Similarly,

‘Wherever (a flower happens to) fall, a novice has thrown (into the

diagram at random) without any (particular) intention, is the name (he or she)

should be given. In the case of Brahmins, Kṣatriyas or Veśyas, it (should) end

with ‘Śakti’ for women and the word ‘Śiva’ for men. In the case of Śūdras (their

names) should end with ‘Gaṇa’.”

Those who know the secret (Kaula) scriptures (declare that) ‘(our

(initiatory names)) are not the same’. The initiatory name (pūjānāma) should

Concerning caryā, see above, note 4,909.
After receiving initiation, a new name is given to the initiate, according to the

tradition into which he is initiated. If it is Siddhānta Śaivism, the nameṣs end with, for

example, Śiva, for men or Śakti for women. In order to choose it, the initiate is sat down
blindfolded in front of a specially prepared and consecrated diagram, which is divided
into parts, each of which correspond to one of the possible name-endings. He is given a
garland or a flower which he throws into the diagram. The name he is given is selected
according to where it happens to fall. See Dyczkowski 2009: intro. 2, p. 393-394.

“ Cf. Mṛgendra Kriyāpāda 8/60cd-61. These references clearly tell us that the names
initiates into the Śaiva Siddhānta received were governed by considerations of caste and
gender (cf. SvTu vol. 2 p. 25, where only gender is distinguished). This is not the case
with Kaula initiates. Their names ended with that of the Kaula lineage to which they
belonged. Concerning initiatory names given to initiates in various early Śaiva schools,

see Sanderson 2005a 398-399, n. 179 and 2005b 120 n. 78.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


end with (the name of the particular Kaula) lineage (ovalli), which accords with

one’s own particular lineage, such as ‘Bodhi’ and the rest. That is said (in the
following verse):

‘Bodhi, Prabhu, Yogī, Ānanda, Pāda and Āvali — one should form the

name of the Heroes (i.e. the Kaula adepts) and their wives (by adding) these (the

names of their lineages) at the end.
on.

Thus, for example, (we find the names) Satyabodhi, Viśvaprabhu and so

gotraṁ ca gurusaṁtãno mathikã kulaśabditaḥ || 265 ||

śrīsaṁtatis tryambakākhyā tadarádhāmardasaṁjñitā |

ittham ardhacatasro ʻtra maṭhikāḥ śāṅkare krame || 266 ||

yugakrameṇa kūrmādyā mīnāntā siddhasaṁtatiḥ |

Again, the clan (gotra)™ (of which the Mālinīvijayottara speaks) is

the lineage of teachers which is termed a ‘Kula’ (‘family’) or ‘order
(maṭhikā). The orders here in Śaṅkara’s tradition (krama) are three and
half, namely, the line of Śrīsantati, the one called Traiyambaka, the half of

““ Cf. below, 29/29cd-33ab. According to Kaula sources prior to Abhinava, whether
those of the Kālīkrama (also called Kāḹīkula, and then just Krama), the Kubjikā Tantras,

and later Trika Tantras, as well as the Anuttara Trika of the Tantrāloka, six Kaula
lineages were established by six disciples of Matsyendranātha. Called ‘princes’

(rājaputra), their names and related data are given below in 29/33cd-41, see also
Dyczkowski 1988: 70. These lineages (saṁtāna) are termed ‘ovallṝ (or ovalli), defined
as ‘currents of knowledge’ (jñānapravāha) (below, 29/36 and Dyczkowski 2009: intro.

2, p. 397). Initiates into one or other of these lineages were given an initiatory name

(pūjānāma) ending with the name of that of the lineage, as listed here. In this way, by

knowing his or her name, it was possible to know which tradition the initiate belonged.
Here, Abhinava stresses the contrast between the Siddhānta and Kaula
traditions. The latter is ‘one’s own’, and the former that of others. Clearly, Abhinava

understood Anuttara Trika to be a Kula. Some scholars writing about Kashmiri Śaivi

distinguish Kula from Trika as separate schools, along with Krama, Pratyabhi
Spanda, that are integrated into it. But this distinction is hard to maintain. Anuttara

Trika is a Kula (cf. above 1/1) as is Krama. There is no separate ‘Kula system’ʼ, although
Anuttara Trika also contains other elements. As noted, these distinctions and
identifications are accommodated and explained by distinguishing between two
‘modalities (prakriya) — Tantric and Kauḻa (see above, note 1,138) within Trika. In this
way, there is no need to think of Kula doctrine as being derived from a separate school.
Concerning the origin of clans (gorra), first in the Vedic tradition, and those to which
Kaula initiates belong, see Dyczkowski 2009: intro. 2, p. 390 ff.

TANTRĀLOKA

that and the one called Āmarda. (In the Half Traiyambaka order there

is) the line of Siddhas (siddhasantati) beginning from (Khagendranātha,

who is the one preceding) Kūrmanātha and, following the order of the
(four) Ages (yuga), ends with Mīnanātha.” (265cd-267ab)
(The lineage of teachers) is called in two ways, namely, ‘Kula’ and
‘monastic order” (maṭhikā). There are not just (the lineages of) the three and a

half ‘monastic ordersʼ (maṭhikā), there are others also, and so he says ‘(the

line of Siddhas . . . following the order of the (four)) Ages’. The word

‘preceding’ should be explained to be (read) twice (tantreṇa). Thus Kūrma is

the (teacher who) brought down (the Kaula teachings) of the Tretā Age. The one
who preceded Kūrmanātha is the venerable Khagendranātha, who brought down
the (Kaula teachings) in the Kṛta Age, and he is at the beginning as is his
(lineage). The word ‘kula’ has not been explained separately, as (its meaning) is
well known (even to) common people, as for example the teacher’s family (of

disciples) (gurukula) and so on.

Now he explains the meaning of the words ‘and the like’ (in the

expression) ‘the clan and the likeʼ.

a dcgī tēīṁtzēz 1| 351

ādiśabdena ca gharaṁ pallī pīṭhopapīthakam || 267 ||
mudrā chummeti teṣāṁ ca vidhānaṁ svaparasthitam ḷ
The expression ‘and the like’ alludes to the hermitage (ghara)
(where the teachers resided), the village (which was their begging place)

(pallī), the sacred seats, primary and secondary (pītha, upapītha) (of the

“% Concerning these orders, see above note 1,161, TĀv ad 1/7. Abhinava refers again to
these orders below in 36/1 1cd-14.

“% The Kaula teachings were revealed in each of the four cosmic Ages (yuga) by a
Yuganātha — Lord of the Age. In the first — kṛta — Age he was Khagendranātha. In the

second — dvāpara — Age, he was Kūrmanātha. In the third — rrerā — Age, he was
Meṣanātha. In this, the fourth - kali — Age, he was Matsyendranātha (also called
Mīnanātha). See below, 29/29cd-32ab and Dyczkowski 1988: 80-81 and 2009: intro. 2,
307-11, The worship of these teachers is a standard part of the worship of the teachers in

Kauḻa rites of all Kaula schools (apart from Śrīvidyā). Accordingly, Abhinava teaches
their worship as an essential preliminary to the Kula rites taught in Chapter Twenty-nine
(see 29/29cd-33ab). Indeed, this, like the following elements listed up to verse 268, are

all specific characteristics of Kaula systems. Their absence in the MV indicates that it is
not, eṣsentially, a Kula Tantra. Abhinava understands this to mean that it is amongst the

Mata scriptures, that are higher than Kula.
““ See above, note ad 1/7 and Dyczkowski 1988: 62, 69, 104 and 123.

“ Sanderson (2005b 121) suggests emending kūrmādyā to kūrmādyāt ‘from the one
who precedes Kūrma(nātha).

“ This is the literal meaning of the word ‘gurukula’. In a general sense it simply means
a teacherʼs school.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


goddess), the gestures (mudrā) and the secret signs (chummā)." (These too

are not taught in the Mālinīvījayottara because) the prescribed procedure
for them (all) is (also) established (on the basis of the difference between)
one’s own (school and that of) another. (267cd-268ab)
“The hermitage’ is the particular location of the hermitage (āśrama) (of

each of) the six princes who have the authority (to initiate disciples).”" ‘The
village is the begging place (where alms are collected). As he will say:

“Worthy of veneration are the (six princes) who are qualified (to teach),
and to whom belongs (this) lineage with many divisions which, unbroken and
wonderfully varied, consists of (both) disciples and grand-disciples. (The names
of the members of their respective) lineages (ovalli) end with the words
‘ānanda, ‘āvaliī’, ‘bodhī’, ‘prabhu’, ‘pāda’, and ‘yogī’. There is (also a
corresponding) set of six hand gestures (mudrā) (one for each one). (They are

made by extending) the thumb of the right (hand and then the following fingers
one after another) ending with the little finger (of the right-hand) and (then) the
littḷe finger from the left (hand). The secret signs (chumma) (correspond to six

places in the subtle body, which) are: the End of the Twelve, Upper Kuṇḍalī,
(the location) of Bindu (between the eyebrows), the Heart, Navel, and Bulb (in

the base of the genitals) (respectively). Śavara, Aḍadilla, Khaṭilla,” Karabilla,

Ambilla” and Śarabilla (are the hermitages). Aḍabī, Ḍombī, Dakṣiṇapallī,”
Kumbhārapalḹī,” and Akṣarapallī (are the villages). Devīkoṭṭa, Kulādri, Tripurī,

Kāmākhya, Aṭṭahāsa and Dakṣiṇapītha (are the sacred seats of the goddess).
These are the set of six hermitages (ghara), (the villages which are their)

begging-places (palli), and (their) sacred seats (pītha), respectively.”"

’ Above Sanderson (2007: 333) explains: 'The term chummā is seen in nonSaiddhāntika Śaiva Tantras, generally of the Vidyāpīṭha, and the Buddhist Yoginītantras
(/√Yoginīniruttaratantras), appearing also as chumma-, chummaka-/chummakā-, choma-

/chomā, chomaka-/chommaka-, and chommaka-/chommakā. In these sources the term

denotes words or hand-signals, by means of which the initiates recognize each other or

communicate secretly. The word is, I propose, Middle Indo-Aryan, deriving from the

Old Indo-Aryan chadman- ‘a disguise’. In this case they are six, one for each of the
Kaula lineages founded by six disciples of Matsyendranātha. See Dyczkowski 2009: vol

2 p. 360 and vol 3 p. 143 (for the chomā taught in the Kubjikā Tantras).
’" Matsyendranātha had twelve disciples, who were called ‘princes’ (rājaputra). Six of
them chose to remain celibate, in the sense that they would not generate spiritual
offspring, and were not given the authority to initiate others. The other six ‘princes’, on
the contrary, were given the authority to found their own lineages. See below, 29/34, 42-

43.
“ Below in 29/38a the reading is -patṭillāḥ for khaṭṭillāḥ.

‘1 Read -mbilla- for mbila-.

‘’MSs Ch and Jh and below 29/38c read ~dakṣiṇabillāḥ for daksiṇapallī.

For kumbhārabhillikākṣarapallī 29/38d and MSs ch, jh, read kumbhārikākṣarākhyā

ca.

’ Drawn from below, 29/35-39, with the few minor variants noted there. The source of
these verses is the lost Kulakrīḍāvatāra. In the following verse we are told: ‘If one who
knows (these) conventional signs (sarīketa) and desires accomplishments (siddhi) roams

in the sacred seats (pītha), he quickly attains from the mouth of the Yoginī all that that

TANTRĀLOKA

(These are all) ‘established (on the basis of the difference between)
one’s own (school and that of) another.’” The meaning is that (the prescribed

procedure) differs in accord with the procedure (krama) of one’s own lineage.
Surely (one may ask), what is the purpose of imparting the teaching
concerning the teachers and lineages in this way? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

fē i áaī qaPJā Qē 1I
tādātmyapratipattyai hi svaṁ saṁtānaṁ samāśrayet || 268 I|
bhuñjīta pūjayec cakraṁ parasaṁtāninā nahi |
(A Kaula initiate should know these things, because) in order to
attain a state of oneness (with his deity, he) should remain faithful

(samāśrayet) to his own lineage (santāna). He must not enjoy” and worship
he desires.' See Dyczkowski 2009: intro 2, 360 ff, especially 362, for a chart with all
these correspondences, and more.

’ One could also translate, as Sanderson (2005b: 122) does, that he must not eat
together with someone who belongs to a different order than his own. His translation
aṣsumes an unstated object, i.e. ‘food’. The enjoyment meant here may well be what the

assembly experiences together. Cf. KuKh 37/68 and 46/290, both say:

‘(Even) if one is Kuleśvara (himself), directly visible, one should not dine with

others (who belong to a different tradition) (ekapātraṁ na kartavyam). The mantras (of
one who does so) become averse (to him) and (he encounters) obstacles at every step.”
It may appear surprising at first sight, but is nonetheless true, that Kula schools

display a marked tendency to exclusivity. This is enforced in the same way in which

caste diṣtinctions are maintained, that is, through the rules governing ritual purity.
Contact with others entails a transfer from one person to the other of substances that are

to varying degrees polluting, according to the manner of their transfer, their nature, and

that of their source and recipient. Caste status relates to the nature of the source and the
recipient. As higher castes are purer than lower ones, they are liable to be polluted by
them, and so should avoid contact with them. As eating together entails ingesting
substances, that occasion is one in which the contact is most intense. Accordingly,
accepting or otherwise of food, raw or cooked, or even just water, is a universal marker
of relative caste status. The latter is determined by the degree of purity conferred upon

an individual by the initiatory rites to which he has access, in accord with his birth. The
condition of any initiate, including a Kaula one, is analogous, even though access to the

initiation that purifies him does not depend on birth. The ritual purity a Kaula initiate
enjoys entails the existence of the same gradient along which impurity travels between
himself and those of others, (and hence invariably lower), traditions as that between

members of different castes. Accordingly, the interdiction is extended to commensality
with members of other traditions, even if they may belong to the same caste. Thus,
typically, even the Jayadrathayāmala substitutes initiatory for caste status and warns the


Kauḷa initiate:


akulīnaiś ca saṁparkāt tatkulāt patanaṁ bhavet |]


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


the assembly (cakra)’™ (of Kaula initiates and Yoginīs) with members of a
different spiritual lineage. (268cd-269ab)

(The Kaula’s) ‘own lineage’ is that of the venerable Amaranātha and
the rest, as the case may be. He who belongs to ‘a different lineage’ is one who
(belongs to) that of the venerable Varadeva and the rest (which are not his

own).”
says:

That (view) is rejected elsewhere (in other higher Tantras). Thus, he

ṃ āṁ caā- srad

etac ca mataśāstreṣu niṣiddhaṁ khaṇḍanā yataḥ || 269 ||
akhaṇḍe ʻpi pare tattve bhedenānena jāyate |

(But all) this is rejected in the Mata scriptures (of the higher Trika

Kaula), because by this relative distinction (bheda), division (khaṇḍanā)
would (appear to) arise within the (one) supreme reality, although it is
(truly) undivided. (269cd-270ab)

(The unity of the supreme is shattered) ‘by this’, the aforementioned
(distinction between) what is to be adopted and what abandoned as one’s own
and someone else’s lineage etc. This is the meaning. The point is that no such
‘division’ in the form of what is to be adopted and what is to be abandoned is
logically possible ‘within the supreme principle which is undivided’.
Having explained the meaning of the text (in detail), he (now) also adds
(to conclude, a general explanation) in terms of its overall connected sense.

ekapātre kulāmnāye kāryaṁ nānyat kadācana |
yadīcched ātmanaḥ śreyaḥ siddhir vā vīravandite ||
jtvitaṁ suciraṁ vātha [k: nātha] yoginyo melakaś ca vā |

atītānāgataṁ yogaṁ bhāvanā bhāvanāśanī ||

taiḥ
sārddhaṁ bhojanaṁ varjyaṁ pāṇagoṣṭhī ca yatnataḥ |
teṣu saṁbhāṣaṇaṁ varjyaṁ saṁsparśaṁ kiṁ punaḥ priye || JY 4/20/140cd-143
’Contact with people who do not belong to (the same) Kula leads to a fall from

that Kula. O (goddess) praised by the Kaula heroes, in the Kula tradition (that enjoins)

eating together (only amongst members of the same Kula), one should never do
otherwise if one desires the best for oneself or accomplishment, a long life and meetings
with the Yoginīs. (If one desires) the yoga (which is knowledge of) the past and the

future and the contemplation that destroys the phenomenal (fettered state), one must

strenuously avoid eating with them and gatherings (with them) for drinks. One should
avoid talking with them, what to say, O beloved, of touching (them).”

See below, 28/60cd ff.

’ Amaranātha was the ‘prince’ who founded the first Kaula lineage, and Varadeva, the
second one.

TANTRĀLOKA

j) Conclusion

tāēarsraa
ũz araṁũũra; ĩra 1

evaṁ kṣetrapraveśādi saṁtānaniyamāntataḥ || 270 ||
nāsmin vidhīyate tad dhi sākṣān naupayikaṁ śive |
Thus, (all these things,) beginning with entry into the meeting
grounds up to the restrictions (niyama) concerning (one’s own) spiritual

lineage (santāna) are not prescribed here (in the higher Trika teaching of
the Mālinīvijayottara), because they are not direct (and certain) means to

realizing Śiva.” (270cd-271ab)

‘Thus’, for the aforementioned reason, ‘(all these things) beginning

with entry into the meeting grounds up to the restrictions (niyama)
concerning the spiritual lineage (santāna), which is referred to (here) with
the term ‘clan’ (gotra), ‘are not prescribed here at allʼ. The meaning is that no
(such) injunction as ‘one should enter the meeting grounds etc.” is (imposed) in

this śastra, (the exposition of which) is underway. This is because it is not a
direct means to (attaining) Śiva. This has been explained previously many

times, and so (there is no need to) exert (oneself to do s0) again.”
Well then, surely (one may ask,) if entry into the meeting grounds and
the like is not prescribed here at all, does that not amount to a prohibition (of the
same)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

3ī īaaā 7 f-īī aa īŪāca aU-NḤ 1| Ṝ. S. I|
na tasya ca niṣedho yan na tat tattvasya khaṇḍanam || 271 I|

“ The absence of reference to the sacred seats and the like, that we commonly find in

Kaula Tantras of all the Kaula schools, even Buddhiṣṭ, is an indication that the MV is
not, as a whole, Kaula. Abhinava, who promotes Anuttara Trika, the Kaula form of
Trika, cannot of course accept this. Instead, he prefers to explain the absence as being a
characteristic sign of the higher Kaula character of the Mālinīvijayottara. Indeed, in one
or two places he refers to it as ‘Śrīmata’ to underscore that it is a Mata Tantra, in his
sense of the term. Indeed, it does teach immediate realisation (although it does not stress
it) as taking place in the most intense form of the descent of the power of grace
(Śśaktipāta). Specifically, he sees this in the passage he is examining here, drawn from
chapter eighteen of the MV.

“ See above, 4/260cd-261ab. Note how Jayaratha here also stresses that the crucial

difference between the Kula emphasis on the practice of venerating the sacred sites and

the rest, and the Mata/Kaula teaching that transcends it as being unessential (i.e. it can
be done or not, it does not matter), is that realisation in the former case is gradual,
whereas in the later it is immediate.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Nor is that prohibited,” as it does not compromise (the unity and

supremacy) of that (ultimate) reality. (271cd)

‘That’ entry into the meeting grounds etc. (is not prohibited,) ‘as it
does not compromise (the unity) of that (ultimate) principle’, which is all
things and supreme. (Indeed,) there is no meeting ground or the like which, in
relation to it, is external, and so where could entry etc. be possible? Thus,
(whatever) injunction or prohibition one could make in this regard is just a
modality of thought (vikalpamātra), and so cannot compromise the (one)
essential nature (of all things). This is the point.


Thus, he says:


faararī fk īerzai afaṝīā fa+fcūaiī |

viśvātmano hi nāthasya svasmin rūpe vikalpitau |

vidhir niṣedho vā śaktau na svarūpasya khaṇḍane || 272 ||

Prohibition or injunction, which are both (just freely) imagined
within the Lord’s own nature, are powerless to divide (and compromise the
oneness of the one) whose essential nature is all things.
Therefore, here (in this school), everything is enjoined and (everything)
is prohibited, and so, summing up, the point is that one should not take up (just)
one particular (one to the exclusion of the other).

Surely (one may ask,) if that is the case, when one desires to talk about
the supreme principle, how can one establish the distinction which must
assumed between ‘this should be accepted’ and ‘that should be abandoned’?

With this doubt in mind, he says:


māaāvavd 3 āīa frā aṛ |

paratattvapraveśe tu yam eva nikaṭaṁ yadā |
upāyaṁ vetti sa grāhyas tadā tyājyo ʻtha vā kvacit |I 273 ||
na yantraṇātra kāryeti proktaṁ śrītrikaśāsane |

Read niṣedho for niṣodho. Rising through successive levels of Śaiva revelation which
illumines the path of the Śaiva schools, beginning with the Siddhānta and up through to

the Kaula and Mata, procedures and teachings change. But even so, the same distinction
prevails between what is enjoined and what is prohibited, even if they are all prohibited.

This clearly indicates that ignorance of the oneness, that can never be compromised, of
the supreme, liberated state has not been achieved.

TANTRĀLOKA

When or wherever (in any given circumstance) one knows the

means to enter the supreme reality which is close (to it and most
conducive), then that should be adopted; (every other) should be

abandoned. One should not impose restrictions (yantraṇā) here (on
practice). (The same) is said in the venerable Trikaśāsana. (273-274ab)

(Nobody) disagrees here that the yogi who wishes to enter into the
Supreme Principle should accordingly make his mind firm (and well

concentrated) there. Moreover, there (in that case), when one knows a means
somewhere (in whatever circumstance) which is ‘close’, that is, is (most)
proximate (to realisation), that serves as a means (nimitta) to attain the supreme

nature by the process of violent digestion (of duality into consciousness)

(haṭhapāka), and takes place suddenly with great force (sahasā), that ‘then

that should be adopted, otherwise (every) other should be abandonedʼ.
‘One should not’, on the contrary, ‘impose restrictions here’ of the sort ‘this
should be adoptedʼ and ‘that should be abandonedʼ. Thus, even when one is

engaged with the objects of sense (viṣayāsaṅga), one may enter the Supreme
Principle at anytime. (The expression) ‘anywhere’ indicates that the proximity
or distance (from the Supreme Principle) of (any of) the means (to realisation) is

not fixed (and invariably determined). The essential meaning of the text

beginning with ‘however’”“ has been explained.

(Now) surely (the question arises) as to what the authority (pramāṇa) is

for this novel teaching (apūrvārthakathana)? With this doubt in mind, he

declares that ‘it is said in the venerable Trikaśāsana’
(He now) quotes from
that text.
aqHdTī ŠEECĪEIÉICIGGĒEUJGIḤ I| ṜQVS 1I

samatā sarvadevānām ovallīmantravarṇayoḥ || 274 ||
āgamānāṁ gatīnāṁ ca sarvaṁ śivamayaṁ yataḥ |

This verse is quoted above in TĀv ad 4/257cd-258ab.
“ Although Abhinava is quoting in the next verse, Trikaśāsana may well not be the

name of that text, but simply, as the word literally means, ‘the Trika teachingʼ in

general. Or else it may be an abbreviation for the Trikahṛdaya or the Trikasāra or some
other Trika source. At any rate, Abhinava is here again, as above (4/261cd-263ab) in his

own way indicating that the highest Trika teaching is sukhopāya (cf. 4,934) implicitly
taught in the MV.
“ See above, 3/261ab (3/260).

“ See above, 4/218.
There can be no doubt here that Jayaratha considered the reference as being to a
specific text. However, it is hard to say whether this is the name of the source or an
alternative name or abbreviation some other Trika Tantra. Abhinava normally refers to
the Trikasāra in the TĀ as ‘sāraśāstra’, so it is unlikely to be that.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


‘All the gods,” spiritual lineages (ovallī), phonemes of Mantras, the

scriptures and ways (of practice), are equal (samatā), because all things are

Śiva. (274cd-275ab)

The ‘spiritual lineages’ (ovallī) are the six lineages of (spiritual)

knowledge (jñānasaṁtati) beginning with Bodhi, which are distinct (from one

another) in accord with their relative seniority (jyeṣṭhādibheda). The ‘ways

(of practice) are (various) aspects (prakāra) (of practice), which include (the
basic spiritual and emotive) state (of the adept) (bhāva), mode of conduct

(vṛtti),” the substances (dravya) (offered to the deity and consumed), the levels
of attainment (bhūmikā) and so on. This is the meaning. The reason here for this
is ‘because all things are Śiva’. As is said (in the Trikaśāsana):

‘All (emotive and spiritual) states and modes of conduct (vṛtti) are equal
in all respects, as are all views (dṛṣṭi) and sacrificial substances, levels of

attainment, and all the lineages (ovallī) as well as all the gods””' and phonemes
in all respects.”

Surely (then, one may ask), who knows that everything is Śiva, for
whom this teaching may grow (and develop in him)? With this doubt in mind,
he says:

fSīāīdi Jdafṝ | 3'u,II

aī ṇīafzTḤ-āHTTTTS
JTEI |

sa hy akhaṇḍitasadbhāvaṁ śivatattvaṁ prapaśyati || 275 ||

yo hy akhaṇḍitasadbhāvam ātmatattvaṁ prapadyate |

For -devānāṁ MS K reads: —devīnām and MSs Ch, Jh, and Ñ: —dehānām. The
reading in MS K and Jayaratha’s citation from this source agree.

‘ The term ovallī /ovalli denotes the six Kaula lineages (Bodhi, Ānanda, Āvali, Prabhu,

Pāda, and Yogin) established by six disciples of Matsyendranātha. See below, 29/32cd39, also Dyczkowski 1988: 69-71. The term and its cognate oli / uli is found commonly

in the Kubjikā Tantras to denote these and other Kaula lineages, and occasionally in

those of the Śrīvidyā school. Concerning the etymology of this term and its cognate oli

as found in the modern North Indian vernaculars, see Turner 1966-71, Sanderson 2005b
12 n. 82, and Dyczkowski 2009: vol 2 p. 397-398.
Kaula practice, which involves the offering and consumption of liquor, meat and

sexual fluids, clearly requires a different basic spiritual and emotive state (bhāva) and
mode of conduct (vrti) on the part of the adept than does the observance of ritual purity

and the rest, required for other forms of practice.
”’! The printed edition reads ~devīnāṁ ~ (all) the goddesses’. This is an unlikely
reading, as a generic reference to gods and goddesses would be masculine. It is unlikely

that
only
goddesses
are
meant.
Thus,
1I
read

for
—devīnāṁ. Although the reading of MS K of verse in the TĀ supports the reading —
devīnām,
the
reading
there

—dehānām of MSs Ch, Jh, and N supports an original -devānām.

TANTRĀLOKA

He who attains the principle of the Self, which is essentially

undivided, sees the principle of Siva, Whose essential nature is (one and)
undivided. (275cd-276ab) (275cd-275ef)

Knowledge of the Self is the instrumental cause (nimitta) of the direct

experience (sākṣātkāra) of the Śiva principle. What is (implicitly) explained by
(Lord Śiva, Who) expounds (the scriptures), is that unlike other systems

(darśana), here (in this one) this is not to be attained by exerting oneself to seek
etc. (some other) separate means.

Nor is everybody fit here (for this practice), only some (fortunate few)
who have been sanctified by the most intense (Iīvratama) descent of the power
(of grace) (śaktipāta). Thus, he says:

The Excellence of the Inner Rite

āEāEGŠURIIKI
Jg Td

hī ī fRakī || ṇv 1|

āĩsf īṣaf̃ evraītza: 1

ketakīkuṣumasaurabhe bhṛśaṁ
bhṛṅga eva rasiko na makṣikā || 276 ||
bhairavīyaparamādvayārcane
ko ʻpi rajyati maheśacoditaḥ |
It is only the bee who delights intensely in the sweet fragrance of

Ketaka flowers,” not the fly. It is only a rare person who, inspired by Śiva,
is attracted to Bhairava’s supreme nondual worship.” (276cd-277ab)

Well, what happens by being (devoutly) attached here (to this
teaching)? With this question in mind, he says:

sfxig am faant= sggīṁī vaāṣza:

Qv 1|

asmiṁ5ś ca yāge viśrāntiṁ kurvatāṁ bhavadambaraḥ || 277 I
himānīva mahāgrīṣme svayam eva vilīyate |

The clutter of fettered existence (bhāvaḍambara) spontaneously

dissolves away, like snow in the intense heat of summer, for those who find
rest in this sacrifice (yāga).” (277cd-278ab)

“° The Pandanus odoratiṣṣimus. Cf. below 13/333cd-336 and 22/45cd-46ab.

“’ This verse is the same as MVV 2/151. There instead of maheśacoditaḥ MVV reads
na bhedamohitaḥ with no variants.


CHAPTER FOUR
--------------------------------------------------


Now, having begun (by describing) the one who is fit (to practice this

teaching) in general terms, in order to teach by way of conclusion, (how it is) in

particular, he says:

alaṁ vãtiprasaṅgena bhũyasātiprapañcite || 278 I|

yogyo ‘bhinavagupto ‘smin ko ‘pi yāgavidhau budhaḥ |
Enough now of (all this) extensive useless discussion! (The matter)
has been discussed at length many times. There is only some
(extraordinary) awakened being (buddha) who, protected on all sides by
praise (abhinavagupta),” īs fit (to perform) this sacrificial rite

(yāgavidhi).” (278cd-279ab)

”” TĀ 4/277cd-278ab (277) corresponds to MVV 2/148cd-149ab. MVV: tatraiva TĀ:

asmiṁ- ca.

’ Jayaratha explains that this verse suggests an etymology of the word
‘abhinavagupta’. It denotes an individual whose identity with the Lord and His powers
is protected (gupta) on all sides (abhitaḥ), even here on the plane of Māyā, by praise
(nava), i.e. the uninterrupted reflective awareness of his own nature.

This line also means: ‘only the sage Abhinavagupta is fit for this sacrificial rite

(yāga).” The sacrificial rite - yāga — meant here is, no doubt the Foremost Sacrifice
(ādiyāga) of union between Siddhas and Yoginīs, taught below in Chapter Twenty-nine
as the Kaula procedure (kulaprakriyā), that is, ‘the secret ritual which concerns only
those whose nature is particularly elevated and so fit for it’ (29/1). Cf MVV 2/149cd-

15lab:

alaṁ hi carvyamāṇ

smin saraṣe saṁvidāsave ||

saṁkhyā yeṣu na vidyate |
teṣāṁ ca prakatīkārāḥ kr̥tāḥ prāg eva vistarāt ||
atrābhinavagupte tu tattve ke ʻ'py eva niṣcitāḥ |
‘Now enough of savouring (repeatedly) this delicious (sarasa) wine of
consciousness within which flow forth great outpourings without number, for they have
been elucidated at length before. Some of them have been discerned (niścita) here
within this new and hidden (abhinavagupta) reality.’
We have observed in the very first verse another example of Abhinavagupta’s

word play around his own name. He likes to do this. We find another one in his MVV
(1/13).:

‘We adore the collection of rays of the moon of Śiva, which shine day and

night but are not within reach of everyone, and (therefore) ever new (abhinava) (at
night) and hidden (gupta) (during the day).’ (Hannederʼs translation)
Abhinava refers to himself as the author the Tantrāloka in several places in it.

This is unusual in India, where authors are loath to refer to themselves much, if at all.
One could think of this as a piece with the practice of the poet who marks or ‘stamps’

TANTRĀLOKA

Now (the nature of) the object of sacrifice, the one who performs the

sacrifice and so on, in their many branches, ‘has been discussed at lengthʼ.
‘Enough now of (all this) extensive useless discussion’, that is, repeated

examination (of these matters), as ‘there is only some (enlightened being)’

who is beyond this world (alaukika) who is ‘fit for this sacrificial rite

(yāgavidhi), described previously, who is ‘protected on all sides by praise
(abhinavagupta). (He is) ‘protected’ (gupta) in the sense that his own innate
(spiritual) glory (and power) (vaibhava), which is his nature as all things, is well
protected, even in the state in which it is stolen away by the delusion of Māyā.
(And he is so protected) ‘on all sides’ (abhitaḥ) in (the midst of this) category
(of existence, consisting of both) sentient (beings) and insentient (phenomena),
completely divided up into endless relative distinctions such as those between
perceivers and objects. (His) ‘praise’ (1ava) is the hymn to his own nature, in
the

form of the reflective awareness of the (divine)

attributes

of the

unconditioned noetic subjectivity (jñatva) and agency (kartṛtva) (of his true
conscious nature). Thus ‘some such’ other-worldly (alaukika) (extraordinary)

person is the author (abhi-nava-gupta), who is such, (and so) is fit here (to
perform this sacrificial rite). This is the meaning.

He concludes this with the first half ofa verse (as follows):


ṢTTRTGTTṀĒTH JITRTTTTṀT fĒṬTT ] Ṝ98 1

ity anuttarapadapravikāse śāktam aupayikam adya viviktam || 279 ||
And so today we have analysed (and discussed) the empowered
means to unfold the plane of Anuttara (anuttarapada). (279cd) (279ab)
(Saying that he has done s0) ‘todayʼ, he reveals that the meaning of the

word ‘āhnika’ (for chapter, accords) with reality.” This is the auspicious end.

Jayaratha has clearly explained this, the fourth chapter, by means of the
glorious power of sound notions that unfold by virtue of the penetration of Śakti
(śāktasamāveśa).

Thus ends the fourth chapter, called the Elucidation of the Empowered
Means, of the Tantrāloka, composed by the Mahāmāheśvarācārya, the venerable
and most excellent Abhinavagupta, of which there is a commentary called
‘Discernment’ (Viveka), written by the venerable Jayaratha.

(aṅkayati) his name somewhere in his work with his name. Safer than just a reference to
the name of the author in a colophon, he refers to himself as such in the very last verse
of the Tantrāloka (37/85).

“ There are many words in Sanskrit for ‘chapter’. One, which is not very common, is
‘aāhnika’, which literally means ‘day’. Here Jayaratha claims that Abhinavagupta

miraculously composed a chapter a day, and so the literal meaning of the word is also
applicable.

Appendices
to Chapter Four
Introduction to the Appendices of Chapter Four
The Sources of the Kramanaya with Special Reference to
the Assembly of Thirteen Kālīs
‘Supreme Śiva, who is the essential nature of the three energies (of will,
knowledge and action), is Bhairava, the thirty-seventh (principle). The goddess
(bhagavatī) who is said to be supreme consciousness (parasawit) is the thirtyeighth principle, (to which one rises) having gone beyond (Bhairava, the thirtyseventh principle,) making him (assume his) aspect as a seat (for the deity). This
very (goddess) is Caṇdayogeśvarī, who impels the wheel (of the energies of)
emanation that consumes (grāsa lit. ‘devours’) all things. She should be

worshipped either alone in the modality of oneness with all things, or along with
the twelve deities who are the rays (of consciousness).”
— Chapter eight of the Tantroccaya

Krama ontology had a powerful influence on the formulations of postscriptural Śaivism. Itis here that we find the earliest referencesin a Śaiva &ka
context to the dynamic divine consciousness whichis the common view of all
nondualist Śaiva post-scriptural developments in Kashmir from the Śivasūtra
onwards, including the Pratyabhijñā. Kṣemarāja was not wrong to think of the
dynamism of consciousness — spanda
— taughtin the school of that name which
considered the Śivasūtra to be its scripture, to be the teaching of the Krama
system. This he deemed, as do the scriptures, to be the most secret and hence
most elevated tradition, with the Goddess of Consciousness (Saṁvid Devī)

exalted as the highest deity, The term spanda to denote the recurrent pulse of
consciousness is very unusual. It is only in the early sources like the JY that we
find it in relatively common usage. While Somānanda preferred to think of the
dynamism of cognitive consciousness as a flow (prasara), he also understood it
to be a kind of ‘opening out’ (vikāsa, vijrmbha). With Utpaladeva, the powerful
imagery of consciousness as self-luminous light and its appearing in
phenomenal forms as ‘shinings’ (ābhāsa) is certainly prefigured in the shining
(bhāsa) of the cycle of cognitive energies and their objects even the early protoKrama texts delight in. It is quite clear that Utpaladeva studied idealist
Buddhism (Yogācāra) extensively, as did Abhinava, and much of his theories of
cognition and fundamental cognitive consciousness are much influenced by it,
albeit in a ‘reified’ Śaiva Śākta form. Even so, there would be no Śaiva
scriptural support for it were it not for the Krama. Utpaladeva’s delightin the
play of the senses, and the manner they trigger consciousness expansion and
recognition of one’s own and universal Śiva nature, is also inspired by Krama
soteriology. The details are many and worthy of a separate study, which we
must forego here.
It is beyond the scope of this already oversized work to go into the
details of all the developments of the early Kālīkula, also known as the
Kālīkrama. Instead, in this series of appendices, we focus on the goddess Kālī

TANTRĀLOKA

and her entourage of Twelve Kālīs. Modified and methodically systematized in
Abhinava’s subtle exegesis of the Kālīs as the deities of the phases of perception
and more, it is the cornerstone of the Krama teachings incorporated into
Abhinava’s Anuttara Tṛika. Although drawn from Krama doctrine, Abhinava

considered this assembly of Kālīs to be the highest teaching of his Anuttara
Trika. He found authority for this view in the Devyāyāmala he learnt from
Śambhunātha, his Trika teacher. There, Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī Kālī is Parātītā —

Beyond Parā.

Passages that illustrate Krama doctrine concerning these Kālīs are
presented in this Appendix. ranging through the length of the development of
the Krama system from the earliest proto-Krama sources found in the
Jayadrathayāmala to the fully formed Krama system of three texts called
Mahānayaprakāśa. We have arranged them in the categories marking the stages
of this development first in the Tantras and then in post-scriptural sources, as
follows:
The Early Krama
Appendix A: Chapter Four of the Mādhavakula, which is the fourth ṣaṭka of the
Jayadrathayāmala. Called the Kālīkramavidhipaṭala, it teaches the rite of
initiation that takes place in front of the maṇḍala of the Thirteen Kālīs.
The Formation of an Independent Krama System Within
Scripture

Appendix B: The Wheel of Twelve Kālīs according to The Collection of the

Essence of the Tradition of (Kubjikā) the Goddess of the Tamarind Tree
(Ciñciṇīmatasārasamuccaya), including a hymn by Niṣkriyānandanātha.

Appendix C: Chapter Five of the Kālikulakramapañcaśatika, also called the
Devīpañcaśatika
The Early Post-scriptural Development of the Krama system ——
the Works of Śivānanda (Jñānanetra) and His Successors up to
Abhinavagupta
Appendix D: The Kālikāstotram by Śivānandanātha
Appendix E: The Thirteen Kālīs of the Kramastotra by Erakanātha
Appendix F: The Twelve Kālīs of the Kramastotra by Abhinavagupta
The Final Form of the Krama System
Appendix G: The Krama Gurus
Appendix H: The Mahānayaprakāśa by Arṇasimha
Appendix I: The Twelve Kālīs and the Cycle of the Inexplicable according to
chapter nine of the Trivandrum Mahānayaprakāśa.
The technical terminology of these texts is extensive and hard to
understand, especially in their earliest phases of development. Accordingly, the
reader will be assisted by a short introduction to each passage designed to help

her navigate through the text and understand it. We will also take a brief look at
the doctrinal continuities and developments as we go from one passage to the

' See TĀ 3/68cd-70 (69-71ab) and notes.

1Y ṣaṭka 4 MSs K fl. 67b-73a and MS G fl. 81a-87a.

APPENDICES CHAPTER FOUR

other, s0 as to present the brilliant doctrinal and literary value of these

interesting texts in the perspective of a history of ideas.

First, we will examine the earliest form of the Krama system as it is

found in the Jayadrathayāmala, and then in the Cincinīmatasārasamuccaya.
The teachings of the latter are couched in the terminology and symbolism of the
earliest form of the Krama as we find it in the Jayadrathayāmala, having

advanced to some degree in the density and extent of use of the basic symbolic

constructs originating in the former. From there we will move on to the first
independent Kālī Krama Tantras, of which the Kālīkulapañcaśatika is an
example. I have chosen chapter five, from which Jayaratha draws the

description of the thirteen Kālīs. The full chapter gives us an idea of the manner

of their worship.
Having presented examples of scriptural Krama sources, we move on to
the post-scriptural Krama. This begins with Śivānandanātha, who was three
generations prior to Abhinavagupta. It is with him that what scholars commonly
call the Krama system begins. While this is true in the sense that Śivānanda
(alias Jñānanetra) did indeed initiate a new, more advanced development of the

tradition, he was not absolutely the first to start it. This has been assumed
largely because the earlier scriptural Krama sources have not been available or
have been poorly studied. However, he is the single most important founder
figure, who heads all the genealogies we have that are presented here in
Appendix G. His Kālikāstotra has been translated in Appendix D.
The following Appendix contains the Kramastotra’s description of the
Kaālīs. This important work was written by Erakanātha, who belonged to the
second generation in Śivānanda’s lineage. Jayaratha quotes these verses in his
commentary along with passages from Abhinava’s commentary on it, the
Kramakeḻi. Unfortunately, both have been lost. Abhinava is two generations
after Erakanātha. He follows him closely, first as his commentator and then as
the author of another Kramastotra, in which he revises some details of his
predecessor’s Kramastotra to fit his own hermeneutical perspective.
Finally, we come to the fully formed Krama system expounded in three
texts that are all called Mahānayaprakāśa. Despite their common name, each
one of them makes its own considerable contribution. Even so, they uniformly
follow the same basic teaching and structure in presenting the arrangement and
content of a series of concentric cakras of the energies of consciousness. At this
final stage, the teaching of the Krama system essentially consists of the
exposition of these cakras and matters relating to their theological identity,
practice and soteriology. The translation of the complete Mahānayaprakāśa by
Arṇasiṁha is presented in Appendix H as an example of the final form the
Krama assumes. We conclude in the last Appendix with a passage drawn from
another Mahānayaprakāśa describing the Twelve Kālīs.

Appendix A

to Chapter Four
The Early Krama
Introduction
The Jayadrathayāmala, from which the passage in Appendix A is
drawn, is a long Tantra divided into four sections of six thousand verses called

‘ṣaṭkas’. These were most probably written separately over a period of time by

more than one person. All the manuscripts we have are Nepalese. Unfortunately,
mostly badly corrupt, the oldest is not earlier that the 16" or 17" century.
Sanderson reads a reference Jayaratha makes to his father’s and teacher’s
teacher, Śṛṅgāra, son of Rājānaka Dāśī, as suggesting that he taught this Tantra.
Whether that is so or not, Jayaratha knew it well enough to quote from all four
ṣaṭkas, whereas Abhinava only quotes from the fourth one. This may be
because, although it seems unlikely, that this is the only one that existed in
Abhinava’s day. Indeed, he never refers to the Jayadrathayāmala as such or by
its honorific alias Tantrarājabhaṭṭāraka, as Jayaratha and the Tantra itself do.
He always calls it the Mādhavakula, which is the name by which it knows
itself. Mādhava is a name of Viṣṇu. The goddess here is related to the

See note to verse 36 of Jayaratha’s biography of his family°s lineage at the end of his
commentary. There Jayaratha says that he taught him the ‘rājatantra’. Rastogi has

understood this to mean that he taught him political science. Sanderson instead sees a
reference there to the Tantrarāja, which is another name for the Jayadrathayāmala. See

note to that verse.

See the following note for an example.

śṛnuṣva kathayiṣyāmi taṁtrarājaṣya madhyataḥ |
138a k) yathā tan mādhavakulaṁ vaktavyaṁ maṁdaropari (> maṇḍalopari) |/ 4 II
117b kh) yathā ca tatra sā kālā (> kālī) tathā sarvaṁ bṛavīmi te |

yo ʻṣau śāntaḥ parākāśaḥ prapūrṇaḥ [kh g: prapūrṇa] sarvatomukhaḥ | 5 (I
nityaḥ sadasannirmuktaḥ [kh g: -sanirmuktaḥ ] kāraṇātītavigrahaḥ |
ajo hy anantaḥ sarvajño vibhur dhātā śivo ʻvyayaḥ |l 6 ll
akulaḥ [g: akulas] sarvato dikkaḥ paritaḥ saṁvyavasthitaḥ |
tasyodaram idaṁ vyaktaṁ [g: vyaṁktaṁ] avibhedi prakāśabhāk 7 |I
nityānaṁdarasoddāmasvābhāsābharibhāsuraḥ [kh: -ra] |

sa mādhaveti vijñeyaḥ [g: -yo] kuleśaḥ kuḻabhāskaraḥ || 8 II

‘Listen, I will tell (you) the Mādhavakula, that is in the middle of the

Tantrarāja (as a part of it). It should be taught in the manner in which it is (venerated)

on the maṇḍala and because Kālī is present there. I will tell you everything. The
Supreme Sky that is tranquil is completely full and omnipresent (sarvatomukha),
eternal, free of being and nonbeing, its form beyond the (universal) cause. Unborn,

endless, omniscient, and all-pervasive, it is the Benefactor, imperishable Śiva. He is

Akula, who faces (and is located) everywhere. This manifest (universe) is his belly.
Undivided, he possesses (great) light. He should be known to be Mādhava, the Lord of

Kula, who is the Sun of Kula. Unborn, imperishable, tranquil, he generates emanation
and brings about withdrawal. Greatly terrible and most excellent, he is the fierce
Kulabhairava. (4cd-9)

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR

Bhairava’s fierce avatāra of Viṣṇu — Narasiṁha. This is a common association

we find in early Krama sources, in which Kālī is identified with Vaiṣṇavīśakti.

We find the same, for example, in the part of the Kramasadbhāva that has been
assimilated into the Kulakaulinīmata of the Manthānabhairavatantra.

The colophon of this chapter tells us that ‘it is called the Tantrācāranirṇaya
(the Teachings Concerning Right Tantric Conduct), belonging to the Kālīkula in the
Jayarathayāmala’. iti jayadrathayāmale kālikule taṁtrācāranīrṇayo [g: taṅtrācāra
?] nāma [g: ?] l 20 l ) The entire chapter is quoted and translated in an Appendix to

CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE OF THE TANTRĀLOKA.
--------------------------------------------------

Narahasiṁha and his consort Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī as Vaiṣṇavī are described as follows in

chapter fifteen of the Kulakaulinīmata:

‘He has eight arms, is associated with thirty Mothers, and he has a Heroʼs Seat.
He is accompanied by Bhairavī and he pervades the channels (253ab). He has the face

of a lion and the body of a man; the Man Lion is beyond measure. He is dark blue like
split lapis lazuli and black like sliced collyrium. He is attended by blue (storm) clouds

that look like crows and nightingales and is the colour of rājāsyagiri (?) and like the

(colour) of Śrīkaṇṭha's throat. He is deformed and is like the throat of the Kālindī (i.e.
the river Yamunā). His form is tamas and he instils fear in both gods and demons. His
face is fierce and he is adorned with the eight snakes. He shines like burning gold and
his face burns with (the brilliance of his) eyes. His body is fat, nails long, and he wears a
tiger's skin. He is adorned with a hundred heads that shine like the fire of (universal)
destruction. His chest is broad and his moustache burns (like) fire, his eyebrows are like

birds (rakṣi pakṣi?). He has a big nose, his eyebrows are twisted, and his glance is
crooked. He has many ornaments and delights in human flesh (259). He roars
repeatedly. His mouth is open and his tongue is a flame of fire. He sits on Yama,
regulating (yamayan) the universe. He bears a tamasic form by which he has blinded the

universe. He shines with sunlike heads as omaments for his head. The turban on his

forehead is adomed with skin of a lotus (i.e. vagina?). He has made a garland for
himself of sun-like heads to adorn himself at the end of cosmic destruction. In (his) right
hand he holds a sword, a pestle, and the lotus of the heart. He holds maces, a skull bowl

filled with the blood of the universe, and a double-headed drum, an ascetic’s staff, the
skeḹeton of a Brahmin, and a wheel which is like millions of suns. His form shines with

the blood of the gods and demons. His lotus feet are adorned with anklets made of the

heads of Rudra. This is the Lion of Destruction, who causes fear and destroys it. This is

the form (he assumes) to accomplish universal destruction. This is the form of the body
of the Person which arises and falls away. This form is hard to behold and bestows the
accomplishment of heroes (vīrasiddhi). This is Yamāntaka, who gives and removes fear

(268).

His energy, which is will, knowledge, and action, has emerged (from him).
Formless and beyond measure, she is the Shining One (virajā), who is free of the

qualities. She is located between the movement of the inhaled and exhaled breath (read

prāṇãpãnacarãntasthã for prāṇāpānāthāntasthā), and is the most excellent mother
(read vara-for cara-), devoid of form (niṣkalā). (Her other aspect,) with form (sakalā),
shines like millions of moons and resides near him. She has three eyes and one face. She
is thin (nirmāṁsā — without meat’), and her actions are fearsome (bhīmavikramā). She

has four arms and a long nose; her hair burns with lightning flashes. She wears a garland
of skulls, and a skull serves as her crest jewel. She wears a garland made of entrails. She

is greedy to devour the universe. She wears a tiger skin and a shawl of human skin. She
is emaciated and her face is emaciated. Angry, she holds a sword in her upraised hand
(283). In her left hand she holds a skull bowl. In her right hand she holds a man’s head.

TANTRĀLOKA

The Jayadrathayāmala teaches the worship of numerous forms of Kālī,
who is sometimes identified as a fierce counterpart of Lakṣmī. These are
sometimes solitary or arranged in groups (cakra), as are these Kālīs. If the

Mādhavakula is the earliest of the four ṣaṭkas, the list of the names of the

thirteen Kālīs we find in the chapter translated in Appendix A is the earliest
known one. Be that as it may, Jayaratha quotes it as an authority in his
commentary, and the names and sequential order is indeed what we most
commonly find. Although they are listed there, and the list certainly served as a
model, they are just one of numerous configurations of Kālīs. However, in the
Kālīkula (also called Kālīkrama) scriptural sources that followed, they assumed
a much more prominent role. Despite its subsequent prominence, only small
parts of the Jayadrathayāmala are dedicated to the emergent Kālīkula, from
which the Krama system subsequently developed. Sanderson (2006b: 23-24 n.
62) helpfully identifies these places, as follows:
‘In the Jayadrathayāmala

Krama teachings are found in the 2nd

saṭka in the kalpa of Vīryakālī (96v8-100r9), in the 3rd in the consecutive
avyapadeśyakālīvidhi, devīṣvarūpanirūpaṇavidhi, and devīkramapaṭala (ff.

2i5r6-226r3), in the 4th in the kālīkramavidhi (ff. 57v61v5), and the

consecutive
sālambakramavidhibheda,
ādyayāgavidhikramārthapūjāpaṭala, and

nirālamba-kramapūjāvidhipaṭala,
vīratāṇḍava-vidhikramajñānapaṭala

(ff. 200v7-2008r6). Initiation before the maṇḍala of the 13 Kālīs (1 + 12) is

taught here in the kālīkramavidhipaṭala (ff. 57v61v5). It is this set of identical
Kālīs that Viśyvāvarta hymns in the last verse of his Tantrarājāvatārastotra,
implying that the teachings of the Tantra culminate here.’

Krama teachings are central to Abhinava’s Kaulism, and the
Mādhavakula was a major source of them. Ādyayāga, which is the centrepiece
of Kaula ritual in Chapter Twenty-nine of the Tantrāloka, is drawn from there.
As this is so, it is very significant that Abhinava hardly refers to Kālīkula
Tantras. In one or two places where it appears that he does, the reference is
uncertain. Even though independent Kālīkula Tantras had developed, he chooses
to follow the Jayadrathayāmala. There we do find references to a ‘kulāgama’,
Her mouth is filled with men’s entrails, her upper crest ornament is the snake
Tārkṣa. She is Māyā, Vaiṣṇavī who, well established, is hard to remove. She is Mohanī
(who deludes all living beings), (but) once known, she gives liberation. She is
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, the supreme destroyer of time. She is Bhairavī, the destroyer of time,

said to be the one energy. The one energy abides in many forms, like the moon
(reflected in) water. She is the ray of Fire of the God of the gods, she bestows long life
and accomplishment to men. As Vaiṣṇavī, she is Māyā. Amongst (the devotees of)
Brahmā, she is Gāyatrī. Amongst the Sauras, she is the Queen whose form is light.
Amongst the Arhantas, she is the Mother (Ambikā). Amongst the Bauddhas, she is Tārā.
In the Kula she is Nityā, and amongst those who study, she is Sarasvatī. (289)”

See Dyczkowski 1988: 85 and 188 n 191.
JY 4/4/38cd-42ab, translated below in Appendix A.
' See TĀv ad 4/173ab

See Appendix to TĀ 29 for a translation of passages from the JY concerning Ādiyāga
and its auxiliary Anuyāga in the form of Navayāga.

See, for example, TĀ28/128b and TĀv ad 32/63.

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR

but a corpus of texts is not meant. Rather the word ‘āgama’ there has the more

literal sense of ‘what has come (from the past) as tradition. The frequent

references to the teachings of the Kālīkrama as oral tradition (mukhāgama) may
be understood to sustain this view. The Jayadrathayāmala, which, along with
the Brahmayāmala, is the earliest known Tantra centred on Kālī and Her many
forms, belongs to a class of Bhairava Tantras of the vidyāpīṭha called
‘Matayāmala’, which were the precursors of the Kaula Tantras. As the CMSS
declares: ‘the knowledge in the teacher’s mouth is obtained within the Mata’.
An important form of Kālī of the Jayadrathayāmala is Mateśvarṁī, which
supports the view that it was a Mata Tantra. This type of Bhairava Tantra stood
at the threshold of the transition to Kula Tantras. As a precursor of them, it
contains extensive passages concerning Kaula Kālī teachings. In this Appendix,
one is translated in which initiation into the worship of these Kālīs is described.
In the Appendices to Chapters Twelve and Twenty-nine, there are two more.
The following Appendix contains a translation of a passage from the CMSS,
which belongs to the same form of the early Kālīkrama as we find in the
Jayadrathayāmala.
The term ‘krama’ has multiple meanings. In the most basic literal sense,
the word ‘krama’ means a ‘sequence’. In the context of ritual procedure, a
krama is a liturgy. It is the sequence in which deities are worshipped through the
utterance of Mantras and the corresponding ritual actions that accompany them.
In this perspective, the Kālī- or Kālikā- krama is simply the rite through which
Kālī, her forms and associated deities, are worshipped. Similarly, ‘krama’ may

also denote the sequence of teachers. As such, it is the gurukrama, that is, the
lineage through which the teachings are transmitted. By extension, the krama is
also what is transmitted. In this sense, a ‘krama’ is the school or tradition in

general. Thus, the Kālīkrama is Kālī’s tradition, just as the Śrīkrama is the

Srīvidyā tradition, and Anuttaratrikakulakrama is Abhinava’s Trika school, as

well as what they teach. The krama is not only the entire teaching; it may also
be a particular teaching that is transmitted through it or other schools. The
Kālīkrama existed in this less developed form before it became consolidated as
an independent school with its own Tantras.
Finally, from an ontological perspective, the term may be applied in a
variety of ways to denote the sequence of metaphysical principles (tattvakrama),
world-orders (bhuvanakrama), energies (kalākrama) and the like. In a more

subtle perspective, the fabric of phenomenal existence is woven with the threads
of the sequences of space and time (deśa- and kāla- krama). The common

nomenclature implies that the sequence of the liturgy with its deities and the rest
is more or less implicitly related to parallel ontological processes. These may be
constituents of the inner equivalent of the liturgy — the pūjākrama, or the lineage
and its teachings — the gurukrama. The permeability and equivalence of ‘inner”
and ‘outer’, particular and universal, micro- and macrocosm, fundamental to all
forms of religion in India, is applied here to these identifications with outer
phenomenal processes, which may be internalized in various degrees and

modalities. The activities of the mind, senses, the vital breath and all else to do
with the psychophysical body are governed and sustained by the deities of the
' CMSS 7/202cd.

TANTRĀLOKA

Krama, as are outer objects. These are understood to be their fundamental

nature, as their energies or powers to perform their functions and act creatively
as processes or ‘sequencesʼ. In this perspective, we have essentially a form of
idealism built on the model of the passage of time and the dynamics of
perception.
Accordingly, the most fundamental and all-embracing process is that of
the one reality and ultimate nature (svabhāva) of all things, which is

consciousness. This is the Great Process — mahākrama — that is, the sequence of
emanation (sṛṣṭi) of phenomena from consciousness, their persistence (sthiti)
within it, their withdrawal (saṁhāra) back into it, and the Inexplicable

(anākhya) fourth condition that embraces all of them without being any of them.
These four or analogous sets of four are multiplied by the first three to make
twelve. The independent Krama Tantras teach how each one, consisting of an
assembly of Kālīs, is worshipped in its own right. The worship of these
assemblies (cakra) of Kālīs in this sequence came to be a standard model for the
worship of Kālīs in various forms. This is what we find, for example, in the case

of the worship of Guhyakālī, according to the Mahākālasaṁhitā, possibly
redacted in the Kathmandu Valley in the in the 16" century. Indeed, all the
numerous Kālīs there are generally worshipped in this format.
Collectively, the three cycles of emanation and the rest are the Cycle of
the Inexplicable — Anākhyacakra — and so is where they ultimately culminate
and from which they arise. That this perspective is the original one is confirmed
by the concluding statement relating to the last Kālī and so, by extension, to all

of them — namely, that the last Kālī, who consumes and includes them all, is ‘the
Fourth state, which is the skilful power (cāturya) to set in motion the wheel of
the rays of the architect (tvāṣṭra) of the three processes (of emanation,

persistence and withdrawal).”'™ This dynamic fundamental consciousness is
identified in the later sources and by Abhinava as Saṁviddevī — the Goddess of
Consciousness, an appellation hardly found in the Jayadrathayāmala. This is
surprising because, out of the many names for consciousness in the primary
sources, saṁvid is the standard one in the Jayadrathayāmala. t is also in the
philosophy of the Pratyabhijñā, and was Abhinava’s favourite. It literally means
‘knowing completely or togetherʼ. It is a common term in idealist Buddhist
sources, but generally not in non-Buddhist ones. In the Buddhist idealist context,

the term ‘knowing together’ is particularly appropriate. Idealist Buddhism — the
Yogācāra — maintains that the emptiness of pure consciousness is the one
reality. The world of perceivers and perception is the domain of thought
constructs. It is like a dream, in which we appear unknowing that we are
dreaming, and disappears when we wake up. Where it came from and where it
disappears, nobody can say. It existed, insofar as it is experienced, but it has no
ontological existence — no ‘Being’; it is ‘empty’. But for as long as it appears,
perceivers perceive their objects. The split between these two aspects of the
momentary stream of perception is both the result and necessary attendant factor
of the dream of existence, of which consciousness, as the stream of perception,
is the reality of both ‘known together’. But while the term for consciousness
may be the same, these Śaiva sources and the nondual philosophy that also
'' This is part of the description of Mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakālī, according to the
Kramastotra by Erakanātha.

makes

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR
use of it consider the

world,

which

shines with

the Light of

consciousness, to be no less real than it is. Accordingly, the Jayadrathayāmala,

also making use of the common terminology developed centuries earlier in the
Upaniṣads and elsewhere, refers to these aspects of consciousness as the ‘eater’
(bhōktṛ) and the ‘eaten’ (bhogya). These terms denote the perceiver who is
engaged in experiencing the consequences of his Karma. In this view, the world
may be deceptive and binding, but it is not unreal.
Appendix A is a translation of chapter four of the fourth ṣatka, called
kālīkramavidhi (ff. 57v61v5). It describes the circle of twelve Kālīs, with one in
the centre from which they emanate, and into which they dissolve away. They
are like thirteen suns. Again, the Twelve Kālīs are rays of the Sun, identified
with the thirteenth Kālī in the centre. From another point of view, the twelve
Kāḹīs are the one sun in twelve forms, changing every month. So there are two
suns. One is in the centre, and another in twelve forms around the
circumference. According to common belief in India, the sun in each of the
twelve months of the year is a different sun. Accordingly, there are twelve suns,
formed from the rays of the one sun from which they emanate, thereby marking
and generating time. The months, characterized by the signs of the zodiac and in
other ways, are, as Abhinava tells us, the rays of the Goddess in the domain of
objectivity (TĀ 4/146cd), and so the time the Twelve Kālīs measure out and

consume is that of the sun. Every three years, an extra month is added in order

to keep the solar and lunar calendars synchronized. This is the thirteenth sun,
from which the other twelve are said to be derived. In the JY, the centre is the
lamp of Kālī, that shineṣ illuming everything with its twelve rays, and so too
itself.

Analogously, the Seventeen Kālīs relates to the sixteen phases of the

Moon in a lunar month. The seventeenth is Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī Kālī, who is ‘the
pure digit of the Moon’ (TĀ 1/1) as the energy of the New Moon (amākalā).
Her Mantra is made up of seventeen syllables. Each represented by a Kaālī,
sixteen of them surround Kālasaṁkarṣinī in the middle, just as the twelve Kālīs
of the Sun surrounds the thirteenth, of which they are replicants. Accordingly,
the texts commonly refer to the Twelve Kālīs as a single unit, describing the
nature and activity of the assembly, and then refer to the ‘thirteenth’. The
Twelve and the Thirteenth together represent major polarities — the former
immanence and the latter transcendence. In this way, already in the early
sources, the Twelve took on an extensive identity of their own, paving the way
for Abhinava to eliminate the thirteenth in the centre.
Moreover, right from the start, they were associated with the dynamism
of perception, and the senses through which it operates. The senses are at the
periphery, and the sentient consciousness that illumines and absorbs them, in the
centre. The former is immanent and the latter transcendent. Here, as we often
find, the twelve are identified as the Kula of the deity, in this case the male
Lord. This is a very important association, somewhat cryptically and yet clearly
made in the following lines. It attests to the soundness of the interpretation of
the Kālīs as phaṣes in the cycle of perception that is central to Abhinava’s

' The fourth ṣaṟka is said to be especially concerned with the Kālīkrama, that is, the

Anākhyakrama. The preceding three ṣaṛkas are concerned with emanation, persistence
and destruction, respectively.

TANTRĀLOKA

exegesis. The twelve Kālīs that are the rays of the Sun of Consciousness are
here the five types of sensory objects and their five ‘abodes” — that is, the field
of the senses, along with the Root of Kula and Sound, which is the ‘resonance’
of sensory perception. So, we read in the Kālikulavidhi:
‘If the five rays (of the senses) within the Shining One (shine) within

the fivefold nature (of their objects), then the one who is the Five Abodes (of the

senses) transcends the five objects (artha). If the Wheel of Lakṣmī (i.e., Kālī)

unfolds within the world, which is the root Kula within the abode of the objects

of perception, then the Sound (of the supernal Sun) is well established. If the
supreme mass of rays present in the twelve rays were to be emitted and

differentiated properly, (the yogi) is then the Lord of Kula.’

Whilst the texts are fairly uniform concerning the surrounding Twelve,
the characterization and identification of the centre varies, although it is clear
that all the variants are essentially the same. Broadly speaking, we observe two
views. As the one in the centre and the twelve around it are polarities, it makes

sense that we find that the Sun of Consciousness in the centre is male and the
periphery female. In the text we are examining, the Supreme Sun (paramārka)
in the centre is a male Sun called Ravi, Bhāskara or, less often, Sūrya. We shall
see that when we get to the DP, the Centre is directly identified with Śiva,
although the text continues, as here, to talk about a Kālī in the centre which is
more basic. Either way, the two are intimately related. The Sun in the centre is
grounded in Kālī, its solar energy (bhānavī), and is the source of the Sun of the
Twelve Kālīs in the circumference. The latter are the aggregate, the ‘family” —
Kula —- of its possessor — Kaula, which is the energy of the Sun — Kaulinī that
transcends it, even as it is its source. Together they are ‘Mahākaula, that is
located in Śiva, the Skyfarer. Free of thought constructs (7). The thirteenth in

the centre is the Sun of Consciousness (cidarka) by whose, will the twelve Suns
unfold. (3cd). In the centre, which is the Summit of all things, the goddess

shines within the inner and outer processes (krama) of her own consciousness.’
So, we read concerning the Centre — the thirteenth — and its unfolding into
twelve. Note how it is both the male Sun and the ultimate Kālī:
‘It is just the Sun, which is the expansion of the abode of the modalities

(of consciousness) (vṛtti), that unfolds. It is twelve, and is located in the twelve,

and it shines within (the reality) within the twelve. He is the leader of the Wheel
of the Kālikās, and has no desire for the mass (kula) of rays of Mantra. They

shine, radiant lights, by the division of the various rays. Their inner supreme
radiant energy (dīpti) shines, differentiating (in various forms). I will tell (you)
that process (krama) that has come down through the oral tradition. The
thirteenth unfolds inlaid with the unfolding rays (of consciousness).” !

The text goes on to list the names of the Kālīs, with Mahābhairavakālī

as the thirteenth. In the DP, she is called, as she is by Abhinava,

Mahābhairavaghoracaṇnḍakālī. Here she is Karaṅkinī, the Skeleton Goddess,

' ṬY 4/4/26cd-29ab.
JY4/4/35-38ab

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR

‘present in each of the divisions.'™ Her visualized form is formidable.

Extremely fierce, She is a voracious Bhairavī (see verses 55-69ab), also called
Tripurabhairavī (62). Herself skeletal, she is adorned with hundreds of skeletons
and ‘casts her eyes (in a frightening) squint’. In her fury, they shine as if
‘casting torrents of thousands of lightning flashes and burning coals.” (57ab) She
is also called Kaṅkāla Kālī — Skeleton Kālī. The Kālikā Kula — ‘familyʼ she
belongs to is accordingly also called the Kaṅkāla Kula (3ab) here. Similarly, in

the CMSS, it is said that this is the oral transmission of the Kālīkaṅkāla. In the
texts that follow, at this first level of development of the Kāli Krama, Kālī often

appears as Kṛśā — the Emaciated One or Kṛśodaṁī — Emaciated Belly. She is also

known at the earliest stage, where it is said, stressing her paradoxical nature, that

as such, thin and emaciated, she has assumed the ‘fullest mode of being’. In
the DP, she is called Śuṣkā —- the Dried Out One, whose ‘belly is very thin’

It is also called, as is the praxis, the Bhānavīkrama. Bhānavī is the
goddess of the sun (bhānu). This is the teaching or tradition of the Bhānavīkula,
also called Sūryakula in the CMSS (7/171-172). We find a reference to this

krama in a verse of unidentified origin quoted by Jayaratha. He does this to
make up for the absence of a specific reference to it by Abhinava, who certainly
knew all this. However, the Krama he had inherited no longer focused on this
aṣṣociation. Even so, he does not omit it entirely. Thus, he refers in the

introduction to his concise presentation of the Twelve Kālīs in the Tantrāloka to
their possible equation with the twelve signs of the zodiac, amongst others (TĀ
4/146cd). Even though he just mentions it in passing, it is very significant. Here,

it is all in all, as the Wheel of the Inexplicable (anākhyacakra), that is, of the

Twelve Kālīs.
She is also called Rāviṇī, Mahākālī in the centre, burning and pulsing
radiantly. She is the female counterpart of Ravi — the Sun. Her name can also
be derived from rāva — meaning ‘sound’, the English cognate is ‘roar’. As such,
it is said of her that ‘the assembly of fierce (deities) is frightened by the deep

sound (of her) HUṀKĀRA.” She flashes forth the Fire that consumes the

universe at the end of a cosmic age. Like the Vedic Fire, the resonance that
accompanies Kālī’s luminosity is the source of all Mantras.
This powerful solar symbolism may well seem strange. The dark
goddess Kālī is naturally associated with the night. Indeed, her Vedic
predecessor is Kālarātrī — the Dark Night — who is repeatedly identified with
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī in the Jayadrathayāmala. Accordingly, one would expect her to
have a lunar nature. Indeed, this is so. As Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, her seventeen syllable
Vidyā is more amenable to identification with the Moon, especially the inner
New Moon of the seventeenth digit. Here it is assimilated into the solar
symbolism (Kālī). She is Bhāskarī, the energy of the Sun, which is associated

' pratibhedagatā saikā devadevī karaṅkiṇī JY 4/4/69ab.

' JY 4/4/84-86ab.
' See Dyczkowski 2009 vol. 2 p. 210-211 for a translation of the visualization and a

drawing. See Appendix to Chapter Thirty for the visualized form of Kṛśodarī given in
the Kālīkulakramakramāṟcana.
'Ś YY 4/4/49cd-54.

TANTRĀLOKA

with the digit of the New Moon (amākalā), and possesses its vivifying nectar.
Sometimes they are found both together, as happens in the Kramastotra. We
are told that the Thirteen Kālīs should be worshipped at the End of the Sixteen
as the culmination of the lunar energy of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī.
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī is a major Kālī in the Jayadrathayāmala. The first ṣaṭka
declares that it is dedicated to her. In the later Krama initiated by Śivānanda, she

is the goddess of the Krama. Indeed, Abhinava must have known of the earlier
form of the Krama prior to Śivānanda, for he mentions Kṛṣodarī once, in a

citation he draws from the Mādhavakula. Iīn Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī’s Vidyā, she is

addressed generically as Mahā-caṇḍayogeśvarī — the Great and Fierce Mistress
of Yoga. Here and in the CMSS, the Kālī in the centre is never called

Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. Karaṅkiṇī is the Kālī in the centre of the Twelve Kālīs. She is
also called Rāviṇī. The thirteenth Kālī listed with the names of the Kālīs is
called Mahābhairavakālikā. But whatever the name, we understand from
internal references that her Vidyā is that of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī.
Although not common, we do find references elsewhere in the
Jayadrathayāmala concerning these Kālīs in relation to Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. While

the link to her is not represented often, she is a pervasive presence throughout
the Jayadrathayāmala, especially in the first ṣaṭka. We find another example of
her association with the Kālīs in the following passage, drawn from the third
ṣaṭka. Here as elsewhere, her luminosity and that of her cakra is strongly
emphasized, and so, as a result, her associations with the Moon and Fire, as well

as the Sun.

‘The wheel (cakra) of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī shines with sixteen moons. It is

energized by the thirteen suns, and has the three fires. Shining, it is the

foundation of the shining (of all these lights). Within that, she is who is engaged
in the process of abandoning and consuming (all things) (even as she) is
mounted on the procession (krama) of Sthitikālī (the Kālī of Persistence, that)

unfolds within the abode of emanation.

(When the Wheel) with this form (and essential nature) has descended

(into the world), then that energy (kalā) becomes manifest. Very stable (and
firm), it abides within the abode of fright, laughter, fear, touch, anger and grief.
It is manifest and very stable within (the reality which is immanent) with bliss
(sānanda) and (transcendent) beyond it (nirānanda).

O greatly fortunate one! When that supreme energy (kalā) manifests, by
virtue of which she knows what she knows, and the means by which she knows,

bhāskarīrūpasaṅyuktā hy amā cāmṛtasaṁyutā |/ Y 2/25/37cd

See below, the description of the twelfth Kāī.
DP 5/48cd-49.

FY 4/201194-195, quoted in TĀ 29/75cd-77. This chapter is called Tantrācāranirmaya.

It has been translated in an Appendix to Chapter Twenty-nine.
See Appendix to Chapter Thirty. Abhinava calls her Canḍayogeśvarī in chapter eight
of his Tantroccaya. See passage quoted here at the beginning of the introduction to the
Appendices.

"In the Kramastotra, both by Erakanātha and Abhinava (see below, Appendices E and
F), she is called Mahābhairavaghoracaṇḍakālī. Clearly, ‘ghoracaṇḍa’ ‘terrible and

fierce’ are adjectives.

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR

is her body. If (the adept) is properly mounted there (on that plane), then that

energy becomes manifest. Just as the sprout of birth arises (as the twelve Kālīs),

it dissolves away (into the centre). Wherever he goes, if he is mounted on that,
then (that) energy manifests. When the (Goddess of) Light (bhāsā), who
destroys the Kula of the Sun (of the twelve Kālīs), is within the Sun, which is

the Kula of (the energies of) Light (Bhāsākula), then that energy manifests
(within it) as a burning fire.
If the one who consumes the Fire of Time is within the foundation of

the Fire of Time, he too, the Lord of the Heroes, swallows (all things,) and then

that energy manifests. If (he is present) in the abode of the Moon that has flowed
forth from the Thousand Phonemes, then that energy manifests within the
wonderfully varied Skeleton of Time. If the one who is called Birth (jātināmā)
(?), who destroys all things, and brings the Kula to an end, is well established in
that supreme womb, then that energy manifests. In the same way, he whose
universe arises and falls away (while) he is content and located within the Kula

(of the Kālīs), (then) that energy, which is his, manifests.’

kālasaṁkarṣaṇīcakre ṣoḍaśenduvirājite [gh?: ṣoḍaśaśaṁṅdu-] |/42 1

trayodaśārkasandīpte [g: -pto] vahnitrayasamanvite [gh: -teḥ] 1
bhāsure [gh: tā-] bhāsurādhāre [all except g: -dhāro] tyāgagrāsakramākulaḥ [g: yāga-

]|1 43 I|

sthitikālikramārūḍhaḥ [all MSs: -ḍho] sṛṣṭidhāmni [k: vṛṣṭidhāmni; gh: -dhāsni]

vijṟṁbhate |

avatīrṇas tathā [all MSs except gh: avatīṁrṇa-] rūpas tadā vyajyati sā kalā || 44 |
219a gh) trāsahāsabhayasparśakrodhaśokagṛhāntare |
sānande ‘tha [g: va] nirānande vyaktas tiṣṭhati suṣthiraḥ [g: suṣṭhiraḥ] l| 45 ||

yadā tadā [k: sadā] mahābhāge vyajyate sā parā kalā |

yato jānāti yad vetti yena jānāti tadvapuḥ [g: yadva-] || 46 I|
286a g) tatrārūḍho yadā samyak tadā vyajyati sā kalā |

janmāṅkurasamutthānaṁ [kh gh: janmāṁkula-; g: -na] yāto [gh: yato] jātaṁ [k: jānta]
pralīyate | 47 II
yatra yāti [k: patra yānti, g: yātra jāi] ca tadrūḍho yadā vyajyet tadā kalā |
227b) yadā (> tadā) bhāsākule [gh: ?] bhānau bhāsā bhānukulāntakaḥ [g: sānu-] (> —
ka) ! 48 II

jvalajjvalanasaṁsthityā [kh: -jvālana; g: -jvalana] tadā vyajyati sā kalā |
yadā kālānalādhāre [k: -narā-] kālavahniprabhakṣakaḥ || 49 |

5o 'pi [g: sāpi] grasati vīrendras tadā vyajyati sā kalā |

184b kh) yadā candrakulāvāse [kh gh: caṇḍakulā-; g: ca kuṇḍalā-] sahasrārṇavisarpite

[gh: -taiḹ | 5O II
vicitrakālakaṁkāle [k: -la] tadā vyajyati ṣā kalā |

yadā sarvakṣayaṁkaro jãtinãma kulāntakr̥ | 51 1ḷ

tadgarbhaparame rūḍhas tadā vyajyati ṣā kalā |
evam eva jagad yasya kṣayam eti hy udeti [g h: hyadeti] ca l| 52 ||
so nivṛtaḥ [k: nivṛtā; kh: -tto; gh: tivr̥ṇtā] kulāntastho tasya [k: nasya; g: ta ] vyajyati

sā̃ kalā |
JY 3/57/42cd-453ab

This passage is drawn from a chapter called devīsvarūpanirīūpaṇavidhiḥ —- ‘the
manner of describing the goddess's essential nature’. The colophon reads:

TANTRĀLOKA

Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī is the Kālī related to the Trika goddesses in the
syncretistic Trika Tantra, the Devyāyāmala. Although unfortunately lost, we
know that this must have been so, as Abhinava quotes a passage from there
describing Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. Conversely, in the Krama sources, she is the
Supreme Goddess (Parā Devī).” Here we are examining the teachings of the
Bhānavīkula. The developments we witness, that we will examine further ahead

as we progress through from the Mādhavakula to the CMSS and then the DP,
are taking place within that tradition. As the name of this Kula itself suggests,
right from the very earliest Krama teachings, central to all three is the Supreme
Sun, which is one’s own consciousness. According to the JY, the Kālī in the
centre is the Summit, who ‘shines with the mass of rays (of the light of the Sun).

She who is within that is the Krama, divided into inner and outer.’” (JY 4/4/3)
The inner Krama is that of the senses and mind (cf. ibid. 26cd-29ab). The outer

is that of the worldly temporal order. As the Sun of Consciousness, it is the
eternal Lamp of Kālī that shines illumining all things (6cd-9ab). Self-luminous,
it does not require another lamp to illumine it. This Sun ‘vomits and devours’,
creating and destroying in consonance with the rhythm of perception.
In all these accounts, we are presented with a range of expressions of
polarities that work in consonance, emerge from one another and consume each
other. Accordingly, the inner Sun is consonant with the outer physical sun. ‘The
one who illumines the Sun (ravi) has emerged from the (physical) sun (sūrya).
Ravī is the inner Sun that illumines all the universe.’ (12) The universe the Sun
illumines consists of the Twelve Kālīs. As such it is the thirteenth. It is ‘the
transcendental Sun of all worldly experience (bhoga) by which Kulākula (Śakti
and Śiva) is enveloped, impelled and fashioned. It is the Fourth State of
awakened consciousness (13cd-15ab). The Supreme Sun is one’s own
consciousness, encompassed by the Wheel of Light — its Twelve Rays that, ever
emergent from the Centre, destroy time, absorbing it into the Eternal Light of
the centre. The elevated Kaula Yogi internalizes in this way his outer Mantra,
and externalizes the inner mantra of realised consciousness, and so achieves
oneness. This too is a paradox — that of stillness and the pulse (parispanda)
within the pulse of the bliss of consciousness, experienced like an orgasm in the
iti bhairavasrotasi [g: nāsti; gh: bhaira srotasi] vidyāpīthe [g: nāsti] śiracchede [g:
nāsṣti] jayadrathayāmale mahātantre [g: nāsti] caturviṁśatisāhasre [g: nāsti]

trtīyaṣaṭke devīṣvarāpanirāpaṇavidhir nāma paṭalaḥ [kh: + 1 57 I] I

Note that in the great majority of cases in the printed edition of the Tantrāloka, the
name is spelled Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. This is the spelling in the Mahānayaprakāśa by
Śitikaṇṭha (commentary on verse 6). However, in the manuscripts of the JY, the spelling
is Kālasaṁkarṣanī, as it is in the Mahānayaprakāśa of Arṇasiṁha (verse 210). We also
find this spelling occasionally in some manuscripts of the Tantrāloka. Both spellings are
grammatically correct. We find that spellings of some proper names may be inconsistent

in this way. Another example is a text Abhinava cites that he himself spells in two ways
— Yogasaṅcara and Yogasaṁcāra. In that case, the variant may due to metrical
considerations. Although the spelling Kālasaṁkarṣanī is common in the original
sources, the spelling in the Tantrāloka and commentary has been standardized to
Kālasaṁkarṣinī, as we find in the printed edition.

MNP Śitikaṇṭha commentary verse six: parā devī kālasaṁkarṣiṇī.
TY 4/4/15cd.

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR

Bulb of the genital centre (15cd-18ab). In this subtle way, the teaching is that
sexual intercourse, practiced whilst experiencing the dawning of the Sun of
one’s own consciousness and its rays as the activities of the senses, leads to

enlightenment. Thus,

‘Union (saṁyoga) can churn (and destroy the very) root of (this) terrible

transmigratory existence, having taken up the Sky in the centre of the Self and
the Self in the middle of the Sky. By uniting the Sky and Self once, nothing
(else) remains.’ (21-22)

In this way, the Yogi is then the Lord of Kula, a liberated Skyfarer
(khecara), his nature the Sky. As such he is the ‘perceiver of perception’.
Undivided, entering there into the mass (kula) of rays, he is then endowed with
(the state of a) Skyfarer, and the perceiver of perception. Within the inside of
perception, the object of perception perceived shines. The perceiver, who is
neither perception nor its absence (drágādṛdga vā?) is then the Lord of the mass
of rays (raśmikula). (29cd-32) Thus, ‘Knowledge, the object of knowledge and

the knower, and the abode which is like the womb of cognition (jñapti) — (it all)

dissolves away in the Supreme Abode (which is the ultimate reality) Devoid of
Ego (nirahaṁkāra).’ (18cd-19ab) Clearly, as we can see from these references,
the idealism of the Krama is well established right from the start. Accordingly,

we are justified in deciphering the many enigmatic statements, which are the

staple of these teachings, in this sense. Indeed, this is what Abhinava has done
in his presentation of the Twelve Kālīs, and so too Jayaratha.

The worship of Karaṅkinī, the thirteenth Kālī, along with the others is

very interesting. We have recovered a rite of initiation here, and worship at the

end of chapter five of the DP.

The Kaula offerings listed here (in the

Mādhavakula) even include human flesh (69cd). An interesting feature of the
animal sacrifice described here (69cd-73ab) is that the Guru who is making the

offering on the behalf of his disciples should vomit. In this way, he replicates
the manner the Goddess Vāmā is said to emit the universe. Another passage in
the Mādhavakula discusses the offerings at length. This has been put in the
Appendix to Chapter Twelve. There Abhinava focus on one of his favourite
themes concerning Kaula practice, which also frequently recurs in the sources,
namely, the overcoming of inhibition or doubts (śaṅikā) with regards to their use.
According to Abhinava, this entails the Śāktopāya practice of purification of
thought (vikalpasaṁskāra). Free of conceptualization, the officiant enters into
the Śtmbhava state in which, with these barriers removed, he identifies with the
deity — Bhairava. Finally, we note that, as one would expect, initiation takes
place by a process of possession (āveśa). This can be immediate for the more
advanced disciple, or gradual for one who is less so. The first takes place solely
by the power of the teacherʼs intense gaze. The latter by the same gaze, but with
the support of fire offerings and mantra.
It is a notable fact that Abhinava has chosen to omit the rites associated
with these Kālīs, although the Ādiyāga he presents as the core of the Kaula ritual

of Chapter Twenty-nine is drawn from the Mādhavakula. One wonders why

We have noted that there is an allusion to sexual practice here. We shall see that the
worship and experience of the Kālīs as phases of the cognitive cycle is explicitly related

TANTRĀLOKA

this is so. It cannot be part of a general policy of interiorization of ritual;
Abhinava takes a great deal of time to describe Trika rites. Nor can it be that the
Krama rites were too strongly antinomian with respect to common Vedic norms.
Abhinava makes it a point at every turn to establish that these are not absolute
norms. Anyway, in Chapter Twenty-nine he lifts passages from the
Mādhavakula and the DP, where such offerings are prescribed and listed. Thus,
the reason can only be that the Krama itself tended towards internalizing its own
rites, and it was in this form that Abhinava received the teaching. This was but
natural. The deity embodies dynamic cognitive consciousness engaged in
perception. Accordingly, close attention is given to cognitive yoga and its planes
of experience, and Abhinava places it squarely in the domain of the empowered
means, which is the category of practice centred in perception (‘the power of
knowledge’). Abhinava explains this as a process of empowerment and
purification of thought constructs that reduces them to the pure nondiscursive
consciousness (nirvikalpa) of Deity, with which the practitioner is thereby
identified. This is how Abhinava understands the Goddess of Consciousness
devours and consumes everything into emptiness.
Jayaratha distinguishes between the pūjākrama, i.e ,
ritual worship of
the Kālīs, and the saṁvitkrama, their identity as phases in the dynamism of
cognitive consciousness. A liturgy for the worship of the components of the
most developed form of the Krama exists in two Nepalese manuscripts. It is
called Kālikākulapañcakramakramārcana. The colophons tell us that it was the
work of Vimalaprabodha, who was an ascetic renunciate and teacher
(parivrājakācārya). We know from colophons that he lived in the time of
to sex and the pleasure of the ingestion of meat and the inebriation of wine, in one of the
three Mahānayaprakāśas (see below, the last Appendix).

There are two manuscripts of the kālikākulapañcakramakramārcana: MS K: ṄGMPP
Reel no.: A 148/10 Folios: 31 paper. Newari scriptMS Kh: NGMPP A 158/1 NA MS no.

1-


Folios:


paper,

śrīparamahaṁsaparivrājakācārya

Newari

script.

kālikākulapañcakrama-kramārcanaṁ samāptam ||

The

colophon

reads:

iri

śrivimalaprabodhapādaviracīta

Vimalaprabodha owned a copy of the DP. This is stated at the end of two of the

paramahaṁsaparivrājakaṣaḍanvayācāryaśrī- vimalaprabodhapādānām idam iti]

The six traditions (sadanvaya) is a clssification of Kaula schools based on their
major deities. It did not develop before the 12th century. The earliest dated manuscript
of this Kramārcana belongs to the 12 century. The main deity is Guhyakālī. We would
expect it to be Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, whom the Kālīkrama taught in Kashmiri sources
universally acknowledges as the supreme form of Kālī. Guhyakālī is the principal form

of Kālī of a later development of the Kālīkrama that is popular amongst Newar initiates.
Although many early forms of Kālī are extensively worshipped by the Newars, judging

by the manuscript evidence and what we know of contemporary practice, this particular
form of the Kālīkrama is not well known in the Kathmandu Valley. Even so, all the

manuscripts of early Kālīkrama tracts along with the JY have been recovered in the
Kathmandu Valley, testifying to its early presence in the Valley. It is unlikely that this

Kramārcana as it stands was compiled in Kashmir. There would be little need there to
import a Newar goddess into a Kashmiri liturgy. It is much more likely that its final
form was redacted in Nepal or nearby, where the worship of Guhyakālī was popular.
Thuṣ, although the Krama worshipped in this Kramārcana essentially corresponds to the
one expounded in an internalized form in the Kashmiri Mahānaya sources, it is in all

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR

Arimalla, that is, in the 11 century, and was a priest at the well-known Paśupati
temple. A number of manuscripts of Kālikrama Tantras bear his name in the
colophons, stating that they belonged to him. Clearly, he was deeply immersed
in these teachings. Arṇasimha refers to a certain Prabodhanātha as the disciple
of Cakrabhānu (MNP A 163). However, it is difficult to identify the two, as
there is a discrepancy of some one hundred years between them. Moreover, if
they are the same, he would be an exception. Śivānanda and the teachers in his
lineage may not have engaged in ritual. This may seem strange at first sight. The
fully developed Krama system as we find it in the three Mahānayaprakāśas,
exemplified by the one by Arṇasiṁha in Appendix H, very much appears to be
interiorization of ritual. Indeed, most of the constitutive elements — cakras,

mudrās, siddhas and the like — are clearly prefigured at the scriptural level,
where rituals are certainly performed. It is possible that the fully developed form
at least was entirely ideal right from the start. However, the existence of
Vimalaprabodha’s liturgy suggests that this was not so. Moreover, I have been
told, a liturgical rite is performed to a set of thirteen Kālīs in temples in Kerala,
that the priests refer to as the Pañcavāha. It would be very interesting to examine
its contents. Research is underway. Until we have a detailed survey of its
contents, it is not possible to say how closely it adheres to that of the
Mahānayaprakāśas. So we will leave the matter as an open question.

CHAPTER FOUR OF THE MĀDHAVAKULA, THE FOURTH ṢAṬKA OF THE
--------------------------------------------------


Jayadrathayāmala,

Called the Kāḹlīkramavidhipaṭala, Which Teaches

the Initiation in Front of the maṇḍala of the Thirteen Kālīs.

67b)

evaṁ śrutvā bhagavatī haravaktrāmbujādbhutam |

prāha prasannagaṁbhīraṁ punar eva śivaṁ vacam [k, g: vaca; kh: vacaḥ] |I 1 II
śrīdevyuvāca
tṛptāsmi bhagavan samyag jñātaṁ tat paramaṁ padam |
mayā tava prasādena sarveśvara maheśvara || 2 ||
adhunā śrotum icchāmi kaṁkālākhyaṁ kulārṇavam [k: -va] |
yatra sā kālikā devī cidakkocchā (>cidarkkecchā) vijṛṁbhate || 3 | j
81b g) Śśekharādhasthitā [k: -rā, kh: se-] (śekharordhva-) yā sā
raśmipuṁjavirājitā |
etasmin yā kramaṁ bāhyābhyantarabhedataḥ || 4 ||
etad icchāmi bhagavan jñātuṁ suravarārcitam ḷ
68a) evam ākarṇya devendraḥ [g: devendro] prāśya paṅcāmṛtaṁ kulam || 5 ||
cidarkaṁ [kh: vidakāṁ ] śekharīkṛtya uvāca paramaṁ mahat |

probability an adaptation of a Kashmiri liturgy, in accord with Newar preferences. If so,
Vimalaprabodha may have been a Newar or a Kashmiri immigrant into the Kathmandu
Valley.
YY ṣaṭka 4 MSs K: 67b - 73a and G: 81a - 87a.

Manuscripts do not distinguish between the letter ‘b’ and ‘’. I silently read b for v

where required. Often the manuscripts, depending on the scribe, read ausvāra for ‘mʼ or
‘n’. This too I silently standardise.

MS g: unclear up to here.

TANTRĀLOKA

Once the Goddess had heard in this way the astonishing (teaching that

had come forth) from Hara’s lotus like mouth, she uttered again a word that is

clear, profound and auspicious.
The venerable Goddess

said:

O Lord! Lord of AIl! Maheśvara! I am satisfied, (now) I have known
that supreme plane by your grace. Now I wish to hear the ocean of Kula called

Kaṁkāla (the Skeleton), where that goddess Kālikā, the will of the Sun of

Consciousness (cidarka), unfolds. She who is above on (its) Summit, and shines
with the mass of rays (of the light of the Sun), is she who, within that, is the

Krama, divided into inner and outer. O Lord, I wish to know that, worshipped as
it is by the most excellent gods.
Once the King of the gods had heard this and consumed the Kaula
sacrificial substance (kula) consisting of the Five Jewels, and having placed
the supreme and great Sun of Consciousness on the Peak (of his head), spoke.

(2-6ab)

śrībhairava uvāca
Śrnṇuṣva kathayiṣyāmi rahasyam idam uttamaṁ [g: ;(?) II 6 |I
pusṣṭhibhūtaṁ [k, kh: mu-; g: (?)] mahākaulaṁ khecare ‘vasthitaṁ bhavet [k:
haret kh, g: ha 1] 1

avikalpam asaṁdigdhaṁ prapūrṇam ubhayojjitaṁ [kh, g: -mujhitaṁ] |I 7 |I

cidarkkaṁ śekharībhūtaṁ [g: - (?)] tasyāpi pratidīpikā |
kālikā [g: (?)] sā [g: (?)] pradīpā [g: (?)] ca [g: (?)] sadā kālipradīpikā |I 8 II
tatrāntare tatra gatā tantre ‘smin tantravat [k,kh, g: tatra-] sadā |

The Sun of Consciousness

The venerable Bhairava said:


Listen. I will tell (you) this most excellent secret, which is prosperity,

namely, Mahākaula, that is located in (Śiva,) the Skyfarer. Free of thought
constructs and doubt, completely full (and perfect), devoid of both (inner and
outer), (it is the) Sun of Consciousness, which is the Summit, and Kālikā, who is

the illumining light of that also; she who is the Lamp, the eternal Lamp of Kālī.
She is perpetually present there within it, like the Tantra within this Tantra.
(6cd-9ab)

sa ravir bhāsurādhāras tadādhārā [g: (?)] hi [g: (?)] kālikā I 9 ||

This Kaālī’ss link to the Ocean of Kula is stated by referring to her in this line of the
Kālīkrama as Kaṁkālakālī (Skeleton Kālī). Here she is called Karaṅkinī, (Skeleton) and
Rāviṉṇī (Roaring One). Other names are Kṛśā (Emaciated), Kṛśodarī (Emaciated
Stomach) and Suśkā (Dried Out).

The Five Jewels are feces, urine, spittle, menstrual blood and sperm. Kubjikā in her
aged, Kālī-like form is also said to eat these five Kaula substances.

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR

saḍāre [g: ṣa (?)] vipulādhāraḥ [g: (?)] sodaśoddyotasannibhā [g: (?)
dyota] |
sphurad vamanasaṁgrāsarāvikī sṛṣṭikārikā || 10 |l
sa ravir devatākāraḥ [g: ṣa ravi (?)] ṟavir eva [g: (?)] tadākṛtiḥ [g:

(2)II

That is the Sun, which has as (its) foundation the Shining One, the
foundation of which is Kālikā. The extensive foundation within (the Wheel of)

six spokes that is like (the Goddess of) Sixteen Lights who, flashing forth,

brings about the emanation of the Sun that vomits and devours. That Sun is
the form of the deity. The Sun itself is its (physical) form. (I lab)

ravi (>raviḥ) pradīpako [g: (?)] loke [g: (?)] sūryamadhyāt [kh, g: (?)]

samutthitaḥ [kh: (?)]|I 1 T I

ravirantargato bhānur bhāmayaṁty (CMSS > bhāsayaty) akhilaṁ jagat | [kh:

(2)I

bhānavī kaulinī yā sā tatpuṁjabharitaṁ [g: puṁja (?)] jagat [g: (?)] |I 12 I|
tatrotpannā [g:
(?)] mahāmantrā [g: (?)-] bhairavāṣṭāṣṭayonayaḥ |
82a g) na prakāśena cākāśe nobhayor nobhayojjhite || 13 |I
sarvāvaraṇanirmukte sarvabhogātibhāskaraḥ |
68b) āvṛtaṁ prāvṛtaṁ yena racitaṁ ca kulākulam || 14 ||
sa raviḥ sũryaturyãṁte bhrãjate raudraḍāmare |
The Sun (ravi) (of the Twelve Kālis) that is the illumining Light in the
world has emerged from the middle of the Sun (sūrya) (in the centre). Within
the Sun (of the Twelve Kālīs) (ravi) is the Sun (bhānu), that illumines all the

universe. The universe is filled with the network (of the rays of energy that
emanate from) her, she who is Bhānavī Kaulinī (the Kaulinī of the Sun in the
centre). The great mantras that have arisen there are the wombs (yoni) of the

eight times eight Bhairavas. (I 1cd-13ab)

(The transcendental) Sun (bhāskara) beyond all worldly experience

(bhoga), by which Kulākula is enveloped, impelled and fashioned, does not
(shine) by means of the Light in the Sky. Free of all (obscuring) coverings, (that
Light) is not that of either, and (yet) is not devoid of either. That is the Sun
(ravi) that shines within the Raudraḍāmara, within the Sun, that is the Fourth
State. (13cd-15ab)

svasaṁvit [kh: (?)saṁvit] paramāditya (> -tyo) nityoditamarīcibhiḥ || 15 ||

Assuming the symbolism has persisted up to Abhinava, we can understand

ṣaḍāracakra to be the hexagon that represents the union of male and female organs. IfI
have understood correctly, the text is saying that the cycle of the assembly of Kaālīs
operates in the course of this union. Certainly, later sources attest to this practice.

Perhaps the text is alluding here to the seventeen syllable Vidyā of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, of

which the seventeenth syllable, emanated by the first sixteen, is the source of the Śun of
the Kālīs.

The Sun with its twelve rays is Kālī in her thirteen forms. Even so, the word for ‘Sun’
is masculine.
These two verses are reproduced CMSS 7/166-167. See below for an edition and
translation of the whole passage.

TANTRĀLOKA

bhacakraṁ bhãsitaṁ yena sa vai kālaharo(?) [k: -naro, kh, g: -jaro] bhavet |

vāhyam [g: vādya-] ābhyaṁtaraṁ kṛtvā maṁtraṁ cābhyaṁtaraṁ bahiḥ || 16 ||
advaita [kh: (?)] saṁtā [kh: (?)] (> advaitasthita-) maṁtrajño [kh: (?)] maṁtrī
maṁtrodayaṁ labhet |
viviktārthaparisyaṁdanaṁdanodyānakaṁdarāt || 17 ||
prāpyate paramānandaṁ nispaṁdam ubhayojjhitam |
It is one’s own consciousness (svasaṁwid), the Supreme Sun. The
Wheel of Light (bhacakra) has been illumined with (its) ever-emergent rays, by
which Time is removed. Having internalized the outer and externalized the inner
Mantra, the reciter of Mantra, who knows Mantra and is established in

nonduality, attains the dawning of Mantra. He obtains the supreme bliss, that is
motionless (nispanda) and devoid of both. (It arises) out of the blissful garden of
the Bulb (in the genital centre), that oozes the (transcendental) reality that is

separate (from the universe of manifestation). (15cd-18ab)

jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ tathā jñātā jñaptigarbhānibhālayaṁ (> -garbha-) [k: tālayaṁ,

l 18 1|

g:

bhālaya]

layaṁ yāti pare dhāmni nirahaṁkāradharmiṇi |
cidānaṁdaparispaṁdagarbhasthaspaṁdarũpayã || 19 l|
vyāptā (.> vyāptyā) paramayā bhāti ṣaḍadhvāvaraṇāṁtige (> -varaṇāntage) |
satvasatvāṁtarāma tyāgālamve bhave nave || 20 ||
Knowledge, the object of knowledge and the knower, and the abode
which is like the womb of cognition (jñapti) — (it all) dissolves away in the

Supreme Abode (which is the ultimate reality) Devoid of Ego (nirahaṁkāra). It

shines in the form of the pulse (parispanda) within the womb of the intense
pulsation of the bliss of consciousness as the supreme (state of) pervasion within
that which is at the extremity of (or ‘within’) the enclosure of the Six Paths, in
between Being and Nonbeing, within phenomenal existence (consisting of)

abandonment, and taking the support (of things). (18cd-20)

saṁyogo ghorasaṁsāramūlanirmathanakṣamaḥ |

ātmamadhye kham ādāya ātmā caiva (> ātmānaṁ ca) khamadhyataḥ || 21 I|

khātmanor ekadhā yogā (> yogād) na kiṅṁcid avaśiṣyate |
antastejo vahistejā [kh: -tejaḥ; g: -tejo] sarvābhāso nirāmayaḥ || 22 ||

58a kh) sāmayaṁ kāyagahanaṁ madhyamaṁ karparaṁ tyajet |

Union (saṁyoga) can churn (and destroy the very) root of (this) terrible
transmigratory existence, having taken up the Sky in the centre of the Self and
the Self in the middle of the Sky. By uniting the Sky and the Self (just) once,
nothing (else) remains. The inner radiant energy (tejas) and the outer one, the
light of all things, devoid of imperfection, should abandon the middle bowl
(karpara) (?), which is the abyss of the diseased (sāmaya) body. (21-23ab)

“ The MSs read satvasatvāṁṅtarāma tyāgālamve bhave nave. This makes no sense. 1
have very tentatively emended to satvāsatvāntare nāma tyāgālambe bhave ca vai |

! In other words, the Void in the Self and the Self in the Void.

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR

69a) 82b g) khacandracaṁdrikā yena (> tena) [g: (?)] ciccakre carccitā ciram |l

23 I|

mokṣalakṣmyā spandanānte [k, g: spadaṁnaṁte; kh: spandanante] kṛtaṁ
ātmānam ātmanā |
candreśaścandradhāmniṣṭhas tathā [k: tatpas kh: tastha; g: -sthasta]

tatkālikojjhitaḥ [kh: statkālikojhitaḥ; g: sthastatkālikojhitaḥ] || 24 ||
kālikāṅṁtakulāśakto niḥkalo vijrṁbhate [kh, g: vijṛbhate] |

śubhā [k: śrutau; kh: śubhau; g: subhau] suvigatā bhāti tadbhātmā pūrayej

jagat I 25 II
śucir agniprabhāsātmā tadā kālikuleśvaraḥ |
The moonlight

of the Moon

of the

Sky

(of consciousness)

is

contemplated by that in the Wheel of Consciousness for a long time. The Self is
fashioned by the Self and by the Lakṣmī of liberation within (that) pulsing
(consciousness) (?). The Lord of the Moon who is located within the abode of
the Moon is devoid in that way of that Kālikā. Conjoined to the Kula within
Kālikā, he unfolds undifferentiated (niṣkala). Auspicious, and well dispersed,
she shines. (Her) nature its Light, (she) fills the universe. Then the radiant Lord
of the Kālīkula is the light of Fire. (23cd-26ab)
The Lord of Kula, the Sun with twelve rays
yadā paṁcātmake paṁca raśmayo bhāsurāntarāḥ [k:- narā, kh, g: -rā] || 26 ||
bhavanti paṁcadhāmātmas tadā paṁcārthapāragaḥ |
yadā loke mūlakule lakṣyamāneṣu sadmani || 27 ||
lakṣmicakraṁ vikāśitvaṁ tadā rāvaḥ susaṁsthitaḥ [k, kh, g: rāvasthitaḥ] |
yadā dvādaśarāśiṣṭho raśmipuṁja (> puñjaḥ) paro vamet (k, kh, g: dvamet) ll

28 I|

tāni [kh: (?)] kālayate [kh: (?)] samyak [kh: (?)] tadā kulapatir bhavet |
If the five rays (of the senses) within the Shining One (shine) within the

five-fold nature (of their objects), then the one who is the Five Abodes (of the

senses) transcends the five objects (artha). If the Wheel of Lakṣmī (i.e. Kālī)

unfolds within the world which is the root Kula within the abode the objects of

perception, then the Sound (of the supernal Sun) (rāva) is well established. If

the supreme mass of rays present in the twelve rays were to be emitted and
differentiated properly, (the yogi) is then the Lord of Kula. (26cd-29ab)
bhavabhāvavinirmukto [kh: -mukta; g: -mu (?)] bhavabhāvāntaraśmibhuk || 29

II

mayā vipāṭalavyagras tadā kulapatir bhavet [g: patibhavet] |

citkhecaratas tv asthaḥ khātmā [kh: (?)] khakham akhaṁḍitaḥ [kh: (?)] || 30 ||

tatra raśmikulākrāmī tadā khecarabhāg [k: ce ra, kh: ce (?); g: cera] bhavet

“ The twelve Kālīs that are the rays of the Sun of Consciousness are here, it seems, with
the five types of sensory objects and their five ‘abodesʼ, that is, the field of the senses
along with the Root of Kula and Sound, which is the ‘resonance’ of sensory perception.

TANTRĀLOKA

drgadaśīṁ (> -dṛgdarśī) dṛgantarānto (k, kh, g: dṛganartānto) dṛśyadṛṣṭo

virājate || 31 ||

na dṛdgādṛdga vā draṣṭā tadā raśmikuleśvaraḥ |
Free of phenomenal fettered existence, enjoying the inner rays of
phenomenal fettered existence, (the yogi) is then the Lord of Kula. Established
as a Skyfarer, his nature the Sky, the Sky of the sky. Undivided, entering there
into the mass (kula) of rays, he is then endowed with (the state of a) Skyfarer,

and the perceiver of perception. Within the inside of perception, the object of
perception perceived, shines. The perceiver, who is neither perception nor its
absence (dṛádgādṛdga vā ?) is then the Lord of the mass of rays (rasśmikula).

(29cd-32ab)

69b) 83a g) abhogabhogasaṁbhogī bhogabhogāgraguhyeśaḥ [g: bhogaṁ-] || 32

I

bhogapiṁḍāṁtako piṁḍī tathā kālikramāgraṇī |

subhāsā lāsate bhāsyaṁ bhāsyaṁ bhāsati tadgatam [g: tada taṁ] || 33 ||

yasya bhāsyaṁ navābhāsā raśminātho hy asau smṛtaḥ |[kh: (?)]
maṁdiraṁ [kh: (?)] maṁdire līno maṁdiro maṁdirāṁtagaḥ || 34 ||

(The Siddha who is the Lord of Kula) experiences (both) worldly

experience and its absence. He is the Lord, the secret (reality) which is the

foremost experience of worldly experience. Embodied, he brings about the end

of the body of worldly experience, and in that way is foremost in the Kālīkrama.
(The goddess, who is) beautiful light, dances (the dance of) the object of
illumination and illumines the object of illumination present within it. He whose
object of illumination is the Nine Lights is said to be He who is the Lord of the

Rays. The temple (of the Siddha’s identity) is merged within the temple (of the
goddessʼs identity), and (so) the temple is within the temple. (32cd-34)

The Thirteen Kāḹīs of the Supreme Sun
58b kh) vṛttidhāmavikāsātmā ravir eva vijrmbhate |
dvādaśātmā dvādaśāstho [kh:

bhāsakaḥ || 35 I|

-śastho;

g:

dvāda stho] dvādaśāṁtāṁta-

maṁtraraśmikulākāmi (> -kī) kālikācakranāyakaḥ |
raśmibhedaprabhedena te sphuraṁti sphuratprabhāḥ || 36 ||
teṣām aṁtaḥ parā dīptiḥ kālayaṁtī virājate |
tat kramaṁ saṁpravakṣyāmi mukhapāraṁparāgatam || 37 ||
pronmiṣadraśmikhacitau jrṁbhaty eva daśatrikam |
It is just the Sun, which is the expansion of the abode of the modalities

(of consciousness) (vṛtti), that unfolds. It is twelve, and is located in the twelve,

and it shines within (the reality) within the twelve. He is the leader of the Wheel

The manuscripts read mayā vipātalavyagras; clearly this reading is too corrupt for me
to emend.

Perhaps these lights are the syllables of the nine-syllable Vidyā of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī,

that is, KHPHREṀ MAHĀCAṈḌAYOGEŚVARI.

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR

of the Kālikās, and has no desire for the mass (kula) of the rays of Mantra. They

shine, radiant lights, by the division of the various rays. Their inner supreme
radiant energy (dīpti) shines, differentiating (in various forms). I will tell (you)
that process (krama) that has come down through the oral tradition. The

thirteenth unfolds, inlaid with the unfolding rays (of consciousness). (35-38ab)
sṛṣṭikālī ca [all: ya] saṁhārī sṛṣṭā yā parameśvar |l 38 |

sthitikālī tato ghorā tataḥ saṁhārakālikā |

raktakālī carvayantī [all: carcayaṁtī] raktāgamavibhedataḥ || 39 ||

sukālī yamakālī ca mṛtyukālī bhayāvahā |

bhadrakālī tathā cānyā paramādityakālikā |l 40 ||
70a) 83b g) mārttaṁḍakāḹī kālāgnirudrakālī mahollbaṇā [all: maholvaṇā] |

mahākālakule kālī mahābhairavakālikā || 41 ||

trayodaśavidhā kālī vījñeyā raśmibhedataḥ [k: -bhedaḥ(?)] |
The Supreme Goddess who has been emanated is 1) Sṛṣṭikālī (the Kālī

of Emanation), who withdraws (all things into consciousness). 2) Then (comes)
the fierce Sthitikālī (the Kālī of Persistence), and then 3) Saṁhārakālikā (the

Kālī of Withdrawal). (Then there is) 4) Raktakālī (the Kālī of Blood), who
relishes (consuming emanation), according to the various ways that blood
(rakta) comes forth. 5) (Then come) Sukālī, 6) Yamakālī, and the frightening
7) Mṛtyukāḹī, and another is 8) Bhadrakālī and 9) Paramādityakālikā. (Then
come) 10) Mārtaṇḍakālī, 11) Kālāgnirudrakālī, who is very powerful, and 12)

the Kālī who belongs to the Kula of Mahākāla and 13) Mahābhairavakālikā.

One should know Kālī who is of thirteen kinds, in accord with the division of
the rays (of consciousness). (38cd-42ab)
paramārkaprabhāśānta (> -prabhāsāntāḥ) sphuratsmaraṇadīpitāḥ || 42 ||
bhārūpā paramā kālī kālayantī [k, g: kārayaṁtī] jagatsthitā |
ekadhā triprakārā sā tridhā sā turyagā smṛtā l| 43 II
paṅṁcadhā caiva ṣoḍdhā ca saptāṣṭanavadhā [g: -na dhā] smṛtā [k, g: -tāḥ] |

daśaikā [g: -kāṁ] daśadhā [g: daṁśadhā] devi tathā dvādaśadhā priye || 44 ||
trayodaśavibhedena grasate sacarācaram |
tenaiṣā kālikā jñeyā tasyā maṁtraṁ śṛṇuṣva me || 45 ||

(They are all) within the light of the Supreme Sun, energized by the

flashing pulse of recollection. The form of the supreme Kaālī is light; she abides
in the universe, generating time. Once (i.e., single), of three kinds, she is

threefold and said to be in the four. She is fivefold, sixfold, and considered to be
seven, eight and ninefold. She is eleven, tenfold and so too, O beloved,

twelvefold.® Divided into thirteen, she devours the mobile and immobile

These numbers denote the serial emergence of the Kāḹīs. Kālī emerges by a process
called ‘kalana’, a term that has several meanings, one of which is ‘enumeration’

(saṁkhyāyana). See TĀ 4/173cd-175.

TANTRĀLOKA

(universe). Thus, she should be known to be Kālikā. Now listen to her mantra

from me. (42cd-44)

pūjyasiddhāṁs tathā pīthāṁ rāśidvādaśasaṁgatam || 49 |I
saṁlikhya maṁḍalaṁ devi mahādvādaśasaṁmitam |
70b) madhye trayodaśaṁ kāryaṁ rāśivarṇasamanvitam || 50 ||
raktena rajasā devi caturlekhyaṁ prapūrayet |
caturdvārasamāyuktaṁ tatra pūjyaṁ kramottamam || 51 ||
mahākālī madhymā syān madhyād [kh, g: māsyā dhyād] ghora maholvaṇā [k:
maholva (?)] I
sphuratkālāgnilakṣāṇi romakūpe pataṁti hi || 52 |
yasyā garbhe [kh, g: garbha] śikhākoṭi koṭitejo [kh: ; g: te ] vṛjrṁbhate [g:
vrjr te] l

jvaladvakadhakāra (> -dvādaśadhakārā) rāviṇī bhāsurānanām || 53 |I
vaktrāva vi niṣdyūta(?) [kh: viniṣṭvā; g: viniṣṭyuta] (> vaktrāntavinisṛtaṁ )
sphuratkalpāṁtapāvakam |
gaṅṁbhĩraddhãna huṁkãra trãsitoccaṇḍamaṁḍalam || 54 ||

O goddess, having drawn the maṇḍala measured out by the great twelve

(Kālīs) associated with the twelve rays, the venerable Siddhas and sacred seats,

Mahākālī is the one in the centre who, fierce and very powerful, has (come

forth) from the centre in hundreds of thousands (of forms). Pulsing radiantly,
they fall into (just a single) pore (of her skin). A fire with billions of flames
extends within her womb — she is Rāviṇī, whose face is radiant light, and whose

form burns in twelve ways. The (purifying) Fire that flashes forth at the end of
(a cosmic) Age (kalpa) has come forth from within (her) face. The assembly of
fierce (deities) is frightened by the deep sound (of her) HUṀKĀRA. (49cd-54)

Karañṅkinī, the Thirteenth Kāḹī
anaṁtādiphaṇīṁdreṁdragrāse ghasmarabhairavām (> -vīm)

aparṇalakṣaparṇādya muṁḍāpīḍavirājitāṁ [kh: muṁḍo-] [kh, g: -tā] || 55 II
sarvādhvapatikaṁkālamekhalādhāmamaṁḍitām [k: -pari-] |

kālarātrīśataskaṁdhavasitāṁ (k, kh, g: -śataṁ-) bhairavekṣaṇām || 56 ||
vidyudulkāsahasraughakṣepasaṁkāśalocanām [g: vidyu Ikā-] |
asakṛtpīḍabrahmāṇḍamaṇḍapāṁ bhṛkuṭīmukhām || 57 II
kākālikuḻakṛṣṇābhrā(> kālikā- -bhāṅṁ ) nirasatkekarekṣaṇām |
cala śirohasta [kh, g: cala śiro-] ghaṭṭitādhvapaṭīśvarām || 58 ||
mahātaraṇi mudraughakeśarī [kh: keśurī; g: keśu (?)] kṛta kurpparāṁ [kh, g:
-rā] |

(She is Karaṅkiṇī,) a voracious Bhairavī (engaged in) devouring Ananta
and the rest of the Lords of the Nāgas (at the base of the universe, to go on to
“° The piṇḍa mantra of Kūṭeśvarīcakra (i.e. the assembly of thirteen Kālīs) is extracted
next in code. This is KHPHREM. The mantras of the Kālīs all begin with this syllable
(piṇḍa) followed by the name of the Kālī in the dative and the salutation NAMAH.

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR

consume the rest above). Naked (aparṇa, lit, ‘without leaves’), she is adorned
with hundreds and thousands of leaves, and is beautiful with a diadem of

severed heads. She is adorned with the power of the girdle of the skeletons of all

the lords of the Path. Her shoulders are clothed with hundreds of dark nights
(kālarātrī) and her eyes are (fierce like) Bhairava’s. Her eyes are like the casting

of torrents of thousands of lightning flashes and burning coals. The awning
(under which she sits) is made of the Egg of Brahma, that torments (its

inhabitants) repeatedly. Her face (is severe) with knitted brows. She shines
darkly like the Kālikā Kuḷa, she casts her eyes (in a frightening) squint. She
moves her head, pressing down on the Lords of the Path. O great goddess who
saves (the afflicted), (her hair is like a lion’s) mane (fastened) by the flux of
Mudrā, fashioned with skulls. (55-59ab)
sphuradūrdhvamahānetravahnijvalitavigrahām || 59 ||
71a) 59b kh) dorddaṁṅḍamuṅḍasaṁghaṭṭasphuranmāyāṁḍagahvarām |
uttasīkr̥tasādākhyāṁ śatakaṁkālamālinīm || 60 ||
aśeṣadevatācakra mākramaghasmarām [kh, g: cakra mākra-] |
nīpatītatvagrāvāra kr̥tārabhaṭibhairavām || 61 ||
(Her) great (third) eye throbs radiantly above (on her forehead), its form
burning with fire. She is the abyss of the Egg of Maāyā, that pulses radiantly by
the striking together of the severed heads and arms she wears as a garland of
hundreds of skeletons; voracious, (she invades) all the assemblies (cakra) of

deities (). (59cd-61)

viśvakṣayakaroccaṁḍabhrūkṣepodbhāsitānanām |
sahasakālamuṁḍaughakṛtatripurabhairavīm || 62 ||

mārttaṁḍakaṁdalāpīḍakṛtakaṇṭhasragulvaṇām || 63 ||

kālāgnirudramuṁḍoghamekhalādāmamaṁḍitām |

rudrarājeśvarākrāṁtakṛtanaṁdva (> -nanda-) nitaṁvakām || 64 ||

(Her face) shines with the fierce arching of (her) brow, that destroys the

universe. She is Tripurabhairavī, (whose ornaments) are made of a mass of
severed heads (of men that suffered) a hero’s death (sahasakāla). She is adorned
with a network of hundreds of skeletons (belonging to the Lord of) Death, with
which she is adorned like a net of small bells (kiṅkinī). The sun has been

fashioned like a banner tied as a chaplet around her head, and is mighty with a
garland (around her) neck. She is adorned with a garland as her girdle (made of)

the mass of Kālāgnirudra’s heads. She is accompanied by Rudra, who is the lord
of kings, and she bears Nanda on her hip. (62-64)

85a g) nārāyaṇasphuraddeha pretamālāriṇīm [kh, g: sphuraddeha preta-] |
brahmakaṁkālasadvīṇāvādanaikavinodinām [kh, g: -tāṁ] |I 65 |I

aśeṣadevatācakrakramākramaṇaghasmarām [kh: kramā krama-; g: kramā kra
nagha-] |
nipitatva gamādhāna bhairaveśānabhāsakām || 66 ||

Line 61cd is so corrupt it is unintelligible.

TANTRĀLOKA

aśeṣabhairaveśānadehakarṇāvataṁsakām |
kṣayakṣaṇasphuṭād vāman nṛttacitravinodinīm [k: -cinna-] || 67 II
dhyātvā sṣvadhāmni vitato pūjanīyātha [kh: (?)] maṁḍale |

tadvad evya (> devyaḥ) prapūjye va (> prapūjyāś ca) dhyeyāḥ sarvā
yathārthavat [kh, g: sarvā ya-] |I 68 II
pratibhedagatā saikā devadevī karaṁkiṇī |
(Her) body shines (like that of) Nārāyaṇa, she who is the enemy of the
garland of great ghosts (?). Her one pastime is playing the good vīṇā made of
Brahma’s skeleton. Voraciously greedy to invade the sequence of cycles of all

the deities , she illumines the Lord Bhairava. AIl the Lords and Bhairavas

adorn (her) body and ears. Emitting (the universe) because the moment of

destruction is clearly manifest, she delights in the wonderful variety of (her)
dance.
Having visualized her extensively in her own abode, she should be
worshipped in (her) maṇḍala. The goddesses should be worshipped in the same
way. They should all be visualized in accord with (one’s) purpose (yathārtha).
Present in each variety, she is Karaṅkiṇī, the one goddess of the gods. (65-

69ab)

The Worship of Karaṅkinī
The Animal Sacrifice
71b) mahāpaśūpahārādyair jalajai sthalajais tathā || 69 ||
khecaraiś cāpi deveśi devadevī (> -vīṁ) prapūjayet |
mahāśaṁkhārghapātrādau kṛtvārgham alinā mahat || 70 ||
tena saṁprokṣayed ādau paśuṁ ghoreṇa cetasā |
paṣcād ghorāṁ samālaṁvya vṛttiṁ paramabhairavām | 71 I|
dvādaśārkodite mārge rūḍho maṁtresvarātmakaḥ [g: svarā (?)] |
vaktrodvamanakotpātapātāt pātayate paśūn || 72 |
60a kh) anyathā paśughātī syād anena rahitaṁ yadā |
O queen of the gods, the goddess of the gods should be worshipped with

offerings of human beings (and beef mahāpaśu), fish, animals and birds, having

made the liquid offering (argha) of great alcohol (ali) in the sacrificial vessel

(arghapātra) fashioned from a human skull and the like (mahāśaṁkhā). One

should first sprinkle the sacrificial animal at the beginning with a fierce
(determined) mind (to do s0). After that, assuming the fierce state of mind of the

supreme Bhairava, (the officiant), his nature the Lord of Mantra, mounted on the
path on which the twelve suns rise, slays the sacrificial animals by the fall of the
portent that is vomited up from his mouth. (If it happens) in another way,
without this (taking place), the animal would be (sinfully) slaughtered (not
sacrificed). (69cd-73ab)

nivedya sahasenaiva dhuned vāyaṁtate punaḥ || 73 |I

The meaning of the expression pretamālāriṇīm īs not clear to me.
nipitatva gamādhāna; the text here is too corrupt for me to emend.

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR

tadā vidārya khaḍgena tīkṣṇaśastreṇa vā priye |

85b g) chitvāśipādaṁ vai saraktāṁ vinivedayet || 74 ||
padmaṁ dakṣiṇamārāṁ ca dikṣu raktāṁchaṭāṁ [kh: cchatā; g: kṣaṭā] kuru |
Having offered it audaciously, he should make (the victim) tremble and
shake (vāyaṁtate (?)) again. Then having cut it to pieces with a sword or a sharp

weapon, O beloved, and having severed the āsi (?) foot, it should be offered
with the blood (?). The blood should be sprinkled in (all) directions. (73cd-75ab)

kardamaṁ kārayet tatra rūdhireṇaiva bhairavi [k, kh, g: dhairavi] I 75 II
nivedya vividhāṁ bhakṣyān [g: vakṣān] balimaṁtraṁ prakalpayet |
ākaṁṭhataḥ pived raktaṁ madyaṁ vāpi maheśvari || 76 ||
tatas tu vaktrakuṣumaiḥ sphurjad arceta kālikām |
mudrā karaṁkiṇīūṁī ghorāṁ bhairavīṁ vã [kh, g: vãṁ] pradarśayet | 77 ||
lelihānāṁ mahāghorāṁ atha devi pravaṁdhayet |
evam abhyarccayed cakraṁ ([kh:
-yeccakraṁ; yg: -ye
kraṁ]

yathāvibhavavisṣtaraiḥ || 78 II

O Bhairavī, mud should be made there with just blood alone. Having
offered many kinds of food, he should think of the Mantra for the animal
sacrifice. Blood should be drunk to the full, or else wine, Maheśvaṁī. Then with

the flowers from the mouth, shining radiantly (sphurjad (?)), he should worship

Kaālikā. (75cd-77ab)

He should exhibit the fierce Karaṅkiṇī mudrā or Bhairavī (mudrā). O

goddess, he should form the very fierce Lelihānā (mudrā). In this way, he
should worship the cakra as his means permit. (77cd-78)

Initiation of the Disciple by Possession (āveśa)
tataḥ praveśayec chiṣyaṁ prokṣitaṁ cāvalokitam |
72a) bahir yācanikāyānaṁ sthāpyāsmai tāḍanaṁ kuru || 79 ||
carukaṁ daṁḍakāṣṭhaṁ ca vīrapānaṁ samarppayet |
karayoḥ kṣobhayogena śaktiṁ preravāṁ (> prerya) samāśritaḥ || 80 |I
He should then introduce the disciple who has been consecrated and
viewed (by the teacher). Having parked the vehicle of (his) request

(yācanikāyāna) (?) outside, (the teacher) should strike him. The sacrificial pap,
the stick to clean the teeth, and liquor (vīrapāna) should be placed in (his) hands

and, having impelled Śakti by arousing (her), (the disciple) takes (his) place
(samāśrita). (79-80)

sabhāvāṁtaprayogena sphuradunnāsya yogataḥ |
karāveśaṁ prajāyeta tadāsau samayṝī bhavet || 81 I||
paścāt praveśayed devyā paśum eva kr̥tārthavat |
daṅṁḍavad vaṁdanaṁ kãryyaṁ tena hr̥ṣṭena cetasā || 82 |
paścād ullāsya pūjājyaṁ kramam enaṁ (> evaṁ) tu naktavat (> raktavar) |

86a g) saṁśodhayet tataś chiṣyaṁ pūrvaśaktiprayogavat || 83 ||

TANTRĀLOKA

By inwardly applying the true being in association with the elevated
face (?), the possession by the imposition of hands (karāveśa) (takes place),

and he becomes a regular initiate (samayin). Then (the teacher) should introduce

the goddess'’s sacrificial animal

(i.e., the disciple) like one who has

accomplished (his) task. (The teacher) should (prostrate, straight as) a stick, and

praise (her) with a joyful mind, and then with enthusiasm purify the sacrificial

butter and the liturgy (krama) in the same way, like the blood (of the sacrificial
victim) and the disciple, as (was done) previously, by making use of (his

spiritual) power (śaki). (81-83)

kr̥śāṁ vṛttīṁ samāśṛtya kṛśam (> kṛśām) evaṁ vilokayet |
punaḥ pūrvatarāṁ (> pūrṇatarāṁ) vṛttiṁ [kh, g: vṛtti] avalaṁvyaiva [kh, g:
avalaṅṁvyeva] sādhakaḥ || 84 ||
60b kh) pūrṇarūpaṁ samālokya kṛśam evaṁ vilokayet
punaḥ pūrṇataraṁ vrttiṁ avalaṁvyeva sādhakaḥ [g: sādhaḥ ] || 85 II
pūrṇarūpaṁ samālokyaṁ [kh: -lokya] mahākāliṁ kulākulam |
paṅṁca bhitvā dhupaṁ [kh: dhapaṁ ] caiva kāyavākcittabhedataḥ || 86 ||
tadā kācais tathākāras tadrūḍhyās tadvilāpakāḥ |
The adept (sādhaka), having entered into the mode of being of (the Kālī

called) Kṛśā (Emaciated), should view (the goddess) Kṛśā, having again
assumed her fullest mode of being. Having viewed the full form, he should view
in the same way the ‘thin’ one. Having again assumed the fullest mode of being,
he should view the full form, the great Kālī Kulākula. (84-86ab)

Having penetrated through the five and dhupa (?) (variously) according
to whether it be the body, speech or mind, then with that form, mounted on that,
they are the destroyers of that (?) (86cd-87ab)

evaṁ ṣaṁbodhya taṁ śiṣyaṁ siddhaṁ bhavati bhãmini l| 87 ||
cidaikyāpūrṇadevatvam ānaṁdaṁ tat svarūpataḥ [k: -kaḥ; g: svarūpaḥ ] |
tadā viddhas tu [k, g: viṁdvastu, kh: vidvastu] jānīyāt tān (> tarṁ)
yathonmādavat [kh: mānya-] priye || 88 II
72b) evaiī tad īkṣiṇaṁ kuryād ācāryo kramapāragaḥ |
yasyevaṁ dīkṣayet samyak [g: samyat] sa mukto bhavabaṁdhanāt || 89 ||
anyathā devadeveśi tilājyānalayogataḥ |
puroktāṁ [g: purāktāṁ] vṛttim ālambya yasya yasyāvalokayet || 90 |l
taṁ taṁ nayati sāyojyaṁ [kh: yojya] vacas tv avitathaṁ mama |
Having awakened the disciple in this way, O fair lady, he becomes

successful (siddha). That is, (he becomes) spontaneously the very nature of
bliss, which is the full divinity of oneness with consciousness. Then he should
be known to have been pierced (viddha) (by the goddess, and is,) O beloved,

like one who is mad.
The teacher who has mastered the Krama should gaze upon (his
disciple) in this way. Whoever he initiates properly in this way is liberated from

the bonds of phenomenal existence. Otherwise, O mistress of the gods, (if that
does not take place in this way,) assuming the aforementioned state of mind,
The meaning of sabhāvāṁtaprayogena sphurad unnāsya yogataḥ is not clear to me.

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR

whoever he gazes upon, along with (making offerings to) the fire with sesame
seed and clarified butter, he leads to a state of union (sāyujya) (with the deity).
(This will surely be so;) my word is not false! (89-91ab)

anukrame yadā śaktaḥ [g: śakto] kuryād vā vyavahārakam || 91 II
yasya yasya sadaivaṁ [k, g: sahaivaṁ] hi taṁ nayed brahma [k: ta nayed
vasra(?), g: taṁ nayad vrahma] śāśvataṁ [g: śvataṁ(?)] |

atrārūḍhaḥ sparśayeta yaṁ yaṁ vā prītacetasā || 92 ||
86b g) taṁ muktaṁ nātra saṁdehaḥ [g: -deho] satyaṁ satyaṁ gaṇāṁvike |
evaṁ vidhiṁ tataḥ kr̥tvā paścād evaṁ kramaṁ punaḥ || 93 II
yajeta parameśāni paścāt asyārpayet mahat |
kalaśaṁ cārghapātraṁ vā pūrvoktakramayogataḥ || 94 ||
tenābhiṣecyataṁ devi kramam asmai prakāśayet |
If he is engaged in the consequent process and performs the rite
(vyavahāraka), whoever it be, always (engaged) in this way, he is led to the
eternal Brahman. Whomever (the teacher) who is mounted here (into this state)

touches with a loving mind, he is certainly liberated. There is no doubt here
(about it). O mother of the (attendant) host, (this is) true! true! (91cd-93ab)
Having executed the procedure in this way, and after that, the Krama in
the same way again, O Supreme Goddess, he should offer sacrifice, and then
after that offer a great jar to him or the sacrificial vessel (arghapātra), in accord

with the liturgy (krama) taught before. O goddess, he should be consecrated
with that, and the liturgy (krama) should be revealed to him. (93cd-95ab)

etadabhyāsayogena ṣaṇmāsāt siddhim eṣyati || 95 II
devadevīśvarī [g: vīśvarī] yatra tatra yāti na saṁśayaḥ |
vahunātra kim uktena vākprapaṁcena sundari || 96 ||
ataḥ parataraṁ nãsti tathyam etad vravīmi te |
evaṁ prāpya mahābhāge kālikramavinirṇayam || 97 II
61a kh) kenacic chubhapuṇyena janmanā paścimena tu |
sadaivābhyasanīyaṁ [g: (?)] hi abhyāsāt svagatir (> su-) bhavet || 98 |I
Success will come in six months by means of this practice, O goddess of
the gods, wherever he may go, no doubt! O fair lady, what is the use of speaking
much and prolixity of speech, there is nothing greater than this, I am telling you
the truth. O greatly fortunate one, once one whose (karma) is auspicious and is
in the last life has obtained the teaching concerning the Kālikākrama in this way,
he should practice it regularly. By practice (his) condition will be good. (95cd-

98)

73a) vācayā pūrvasiddhiś (> pūrnasiddhiṁ) ca sādhayaty [g: sādhayety] eva
nānyathā |
evaṁ rahasyam [g: raha m] ākhyātaṁ suguptaṁ kālikākramarṁ |) 99 ||
kathanīyaṁ na caiveha śiṣye maṁdaparīkṣite |

" If the disciple cannot be totally merged into the deity by this initiation, he is conjoined

to it by this milder rite. Although there is no complete āvesśa, he is conjoined to the deity
by the teacher’s gaze as he makes offerings of sesame seeds into the fire.

TANTRĀLOKA

anājñayā kathed yo hi sa mahāpātakī bhavet || 100 |l
paśyate narakaṁ ghoraṁ yāvadābhūtasaṁplavam [kh: -hūta-] |
na kadācid asau mucye narakād rauravād iha || 101 I
eva sthitiṁ tam āsthāya varttitavyaṁ tadā naraiḥ |
He accomplishes the complete accomplishment by (his) speech (alone),
and not otherwise. In this way, the secret that has been kept well-hidden has
been disclosed, that is the Kālikākrama. It should not be told here to a disciple

who has been tested little. He who discloses it without permission is a great
sinner. He sees a terrible hell and there will be a most astonishing (and terrible)

calamity. He will never be liberated from the Raurava hell. Having assumed this
condition, men should then abide (in their practice). (100-102ab)

Appendix B
to Chapter Four

The Wheel of Twelve Kālīs According to Chapter Seven of
the Ciñciṇīmatasārasamuccaya — The Collection of the Essence of the
Tradition of (Kubjikā) the Goddess of the Tamarind Tree

The Cinñcinīmatasārasamuccaya is a Kubjikā Tantra. Much of this

short tract, less than one thousand verses long, is dedicated to the presentation of
Kaula schools in four categories called ‘āmnāya’ — ‘sacred tradition’ or ‘ghara’
— ‘house’, symbolically situated in four cardinal directions. This is the earliest
example of this system of classification, that by the thirteenth or fourteenth
century developed into six traditions (sadāmnāya). The division of the ‘currents’
(Śśrotas) of Śaivāgama are also set in directions, but these are the directions
Sadāśiva’s five faces are facing. This classification of Kaula schools implicitly
relates them to directions in the outer world. Indeed, to a degree, they can be
said to be so. The ‘urtarāmnāya — the Northern Tradition of the Kālīkula — may
well have originated in the North of the Indian subcontinent, where Odḍdiyāna,

the place with which this āmnāya is related, is located, in the period of the
development of the Krama that follows after the Kālīkrama taught in the JY.
The CMSS refers to Matsyendranātha, deemed to be the founder of
Kaulism in this Age, as part of the pūrvāmnāya — the ‘preceding tradition’. This
ascription is made from the perspective of the Kubjikā Tantras, to which the

CMSS belongs. The Kubjikāmata, the first Kubjikā Tantra, refers to

Matsyendranātha and his school in this way. Here Matsyendranātha and his
Kauliṣm are linked to Trika. This makes good sense, considering the strong
influence Trika had on Kubjikā’s paścimāmnāya. However, this setup is not
built into the Krama teachings presented as those of the uttarāmnāya in the
CMSS. The CMSS’s account of this and the other āmnāyas is borrowed from
the sources of those traditions, incorporating them wholesale. As the CMSS
knows Matsyendranātha and the āmnāya system, it belongs to a later period,
along with other Tantras that do so. Even so, the passage we are examining
belongs to the Bhānavīkula we have been examining as the earliest form of the
Krama, in which Matsyendranātha plays no role.
The Krama of the CMSS appears to be the state in which it was at the
time of Niṣkriyānanda. According to the lineages outlined in the Tantras, he
marks the emergence of the Kālīkula from the Kālīmata of the JY, much as

Śivānanda, three generations later, marks the emergence of the independent
post-scriptural Krama system from the scriptural Kālīkula. As we shall see, the
Yonigahvaratantra and the Devīpañcaśatika know four generations of teachers.
These are, along with their consorts: 1) Niṣkriyānanda and Jñānadīpti, 2)
Vidyānanada and Raktā 3) Śaktyānanada and Mahānanadā, 4) Śivānanda and
Ratnā. Jayaratha quotes the DP, where these teachers are listed, remarking that
they transmitted the secret Kaula tradition, that is, the Krama. Out of these four
' See Dyczkowski 1988: 68-71 and 79-84 for a detailed presentation and chart.
YGT folio 17b.

Introḍuction to TĀ 29/43-46ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

generations, the CMSS knows just the first two, that is, Niṣkriyānanda and his
disciple Vidyānanda. He is followed by Śaktyanda, about whom we know
nothing. Then comes Śivānanda who, as we shall see in Appendix D, steps out
of scripture into history. Thus we can establish the following relative
chronology: the Mādhavakula
> the passage in the CMSS > the
Devīpañcaśatika, the Yonigahvaratantra and other early Krama Tantras >
Śivānanda, who initiates post-scriptural Krama, that developed into the fully
formed Krama system.
_Conceming Niṣkriyānanda, the CMSS tells u5 that he was also called
by Krodha Muni. Thus, he was called Niṣkriyānanda. He transmitted the
teaching, the essence of which is expounded in the fifty verses attributed to him,
to Vidyānanda. Instead of coming from a deity, the original teaching comes
from Durvās — also called Krodha Rāja or Muni — the Wrathful King or Sage.
He also appears in the tradition of nondualist Śaivism that came down to
Somānanda, as its original recipient from Śrīkaṇṭha on Mount Kailāśa. He holds

a similar position as the original propagator of doctrine in the Śrīvidyā tradition,

where Lopamudrā is said to be his consort.
Both Niṣkriyānanda and his disciple Vidyānanda are described as
ascetics that look like wild tribal Śābaras (182c and 240). Niṣkriyānanda used to
stare up into the sky, a typical posture (mudrā) of Tantric yogis.’ While the later
Krama system founded by Śivānanda came from Oḍḍiyāna, Niṣkriyānanda lived
in a cave to the north of Śrīśaila, a ‘Śivapīṭha’ (184c)in whatis now Andhra

a notorious place commonly portrayed in early Sanskrit
literature as a place where ascetics of this sort reside. There this Krama Yogi,
beloved of the Yoginīs (237ab), had no need of ritual, or even to internalize it.

The text tells us more about the way of life of his disciple Vidyānanda than him,
but no doubt it was much the same. Vidyānanda lived in cremation grounds. As
‘a Siddha devoted to the practice of Yoga’ (182c), he wondered about at night
repeating Mantra, searching for a yoginī as a partner (niśātana), both as a
solitary Kaula adept (vīra), master of Yoga (yogeśvara), and together with
others and their partners in communal sexual rituals (cakracara) (182-184ab).

Originally a disciple of Śīlāciti, who must have been a Kaula, he progressed to
the Kālikā Krama, which is the Knowledge of Inaction, the knowledge of Vāmā.

(184cd-188)

Niṣkriyānanda’s Hymn in Fifty Verses is recorded in the CMSS (7/189240). It is a eulogy of fifty planes (bhūmikā) of Yoga. Indeed, it is strikingly
visionary. Typical of the finest expositions of the teachings of the Kālī Krama,
neither myth nor philosophy, one can only call it ‘mysticalʼ’. Through this
‘Knowledge of Inaction’, Niṣkriyānanda revealed the ‘Kaula nectar’ and how to
drink it (174cd-180ab), which appears to be elevated yogic cunnilingus. This is

the teaching of the Mahākālīkrama, also called Kālikākrama, which is that of the

Twelve Kaālīs, that Niṣkriyānanda transmits to his disciple Vidyānanda. It is the
‘transmission of the Kālīkaṅkāla — the Skeleton of Time’. This is the Kaṅkāla
Kula, which unfolds within the emptiness of the male polarity. (He is the Sky,
CMSS 7/157cd-160.
Devotees of Rāma Avadhūta, also called Aghoreśvara of Kinnarām’s lineage in
Benares, venerate photographs of him staring up into the sky.

APPENDIX B CHAPTER FOUR

which is the Kaula reality of the Kaṅkāla Kula within the Sky.) She is the
energy of Kaula Kaṅkāla, and so is the consuming fire of absorption (grāsa).

The Manthānabhairavatantra refers to a form of Kālī called Kālakaṅkālakaulikī
(KuKh 61/69). She is the Kālī of the Skeleton of Time (KuKh 63/37).
Kālakaṅkāla Bhairava governs the Wheel of Rudras in the cremation ground
called Karavīra (KuKh 6/26), which is linked to the ‘tradition of the North’ and
the Kāḹīkrama in a special way. Clearly, the ‘Skeleton’ represents Time, that
Kālī consumes. Thus, we read:
‘One's own form devoid of form is the form between form and nonform. The undifferentiated reality (niṣkala) is everywhere manifest (udita), free
of Being and Nonbeing. Kālī, the Supreme Goddess who devours the Skeleton

(kaṅkāla), is manifest (uditā) there. Once having drunk from the vessel of the

sprout (kandala) of the Skeleton born of the nectar of the Sky, she is made to
pulsate (ghūrmitā) and to vomit (vamitā), and so the universe comes into

being.

In other words, the Kālī in the centre emits — ‘vomits’ —— the Twelve

Kālīs that surround her in the manifest world of the time — that of the Year, and

then absorbs — ‘devours’ — it again. Thus:

‘One should contemplate the divine Yoni who contains in herself the
energy within the energy of the Great Time, that is, Kālacakreśvarī (the Mistress
of the Wheel of Time). Thuṣ, she is known as Kālī who devours the Kula of the

Skeleton. The eṣsential nature of Being and Nonbeing is relished by the

consciousness of the Wheel of Consciousness.’

Names of this Krama tradition are derived from how the centre of this
assembly of Kālīs is named or the assembly itself. Here ‘Kula’ — ‘the familyʼ —
denotes the Twelve Kaālīs. The name of the Kula is derived from the deity who
resides in the centre, be it a god or a goddess. It is his or her Kuḻa. In the account
in the CMSS, it is variously called the Kumārī Kula (157ab), Sūrya Kula (171),

and Kaulakaṅkāla (203cd). Here the term ‘krama” denotes the Kālikākrama,
which is the supreme Krama of the Twelve Kaālīs (162), collectively called the
Inexplicable — Anākhyakrama, or just Spanda. More specifically, it is called the
Bhānavīkrama (which is defined in 224). The goddess in the centre is given

various names and corresponding identities. One of the most specific to this

passage is Khaṇḍinī (155), which presumes that her assembly of Kaālīs is called
Khaṇḍacakra, This is a very unusual and specific name. It is related to the

goddess'’s identity as Kunṇḍalinī, presumably because she ‘breaks apart’

(khaṇḍinī), that is, pierces through the cakras in the subtle body as she ascends
through it. Thus she ‘consumes’ the Kaulika body, absorbing it into herself.
Again, she is called Kāleśvarī — the Mistress of Time — who consumes
the Kumārīkuḹa — that is the Twelve Kālīs. Kumārī is in the centre of the Wheel
CMSS 7/222.
CMSS 7/226-229ab (40).

Srīkubjikāmate khaṇḍacakravicāre amum evārthaṁ pradhānatayādhikṛtyādiṣṭam

māyoparimahāmāyā trikoṇānanda-rūpiṇī | PTV p. 184

TANTRĀLOKA

of the Twelve Kālīs; thus, they are her ‘family’ or aggregate of energies and
aspects that she devours (249ab). The supreme abode (sthāna) of Khaṇḍinī is

concerning the Kālīs. Generically, she is called Kauleśvarī, Kaulinīśakti
(defined apophatically as ‘the will’ in 173-174ab), Kauleśī (167) or Kaulinī
(defined in 203cd-204ab). The deity digests (‘devours’) the Twelve Kālīs into

herself and so consumes the cycle of time, making it one with her eternal
consciousness. As such, she is Kṛśodaṁ (171). Although she consumes
everything into herself, she is thin as a skeleton, to symbolize that she is devoid
of any phenomenal nature (niḥsvabhāva). Thus, she is the all-consuming Void
of consciousness — the Abyss of the Kula of the Twelve Kālīs — Kulagahvarī,
into which they disappear and from out of which they emerge, like the setting
and riṣing sun. Thus, we read:
‘The Void (of the Twelve Kālīs) that has arisen from the Void (of the
Sun in the centre) is within the Wheel of the outpouring (udbhava), divided up
(vibhakta) (into the Twelve Kaālīs). The form of the Kālī of the light of the

Twelve Suns is the Void (of transcendence in the centre), and she devours the
Void (of immanence of the circumference). (188-189)

The two Voids, like the two Suns, are the Twelve Kālis and the

thirteenth. The former is immanent - the Emptiness of phenomena, and the latter

transcendent — the Emptiness of the goddess’s eternal consciousness. Just as

they emanate from one another, they consume each other. We have already

observed that at the earliest stage exemplified by the passage in the JY, the
Twelve Kālīs and the Thirteenth, the one Kālī, are juxtaposed as complementary
polarities. These two Voids — the former the reflection (pratibimba) and the
latter the original image (bimba) — the Wheel and the essential nature, Akula (or
Kaula) and Kula, and the two Suns. According to the teachings of the Sūryakula
(also called the Bhānavīkula) — the Kula of the Sun, the Twelve Kālīs are
reflections that shine like the rays of the sun around the original form (bimba),
which is the thirteenth Kālī in the centre. Thus, in a way, there are two Suns —

the original form (bimba) and its twelvefold reflection that arises from it. The
world of manifestation seemingly consumes its transcendental source even as it

is born from it.

Bhānavī Kaulinī is known to the JY, but only mentioned once, in a

passage found also in the CMSS." Clearly, there is a continuity from the Mata

of the JY, which is inspired by the energy of the Mata, and transmits it and the
Kālīkrama in general, of which this is a branch. The CMSS stresses that Kāḹī is
the energy of the Sun (bhānavī), consisting of the twelve risen (suns). (204cd).

The text repeatedly refers to the Twelve. This is because the twelve are the one
Sun — ravi. These twelve, in other words, form a unit that is voraciously intent
on devouring (grāsaghasmara), consuming and digesting into the Void of the
Sky of consciousness within which the Sun rises. Although the CMSS preserves
the identity of the Kālī in the centre, the understanding of her nature has become
more subtle by identifying her and her twelve-fold emanation as the Void.

See verse 172 and note.

! CMSS 7/166-167 = IY 4/4/11cd-13ab. See below.

APPENDIX B CHAPTER FOUR

Twelve Kālīs surrounds the one in the centre; each reflect her like so many

mirrors. It is like a single face reflected in twelve mirrors.

‘She is Kṛṣodarī (the Thin One) of the Kula of the Sun. The Wheel has
arisen from that essential nature, and it is established within the rhythm (gati) of

the Sun of the Sun (bhānvarka) of Consciousness. It shines as if it were a

reflection (pratibimba), its sole intent is to devour the original image (bimba).”!

Thus, Takṣāvarta says in his Tantrarājāvatārastotra: ḹ sing the praise

of the sequence-transcending circle of powers animated by the supreme Goddess
that resembles a single face appearing in contact with a series of mirrors.’' As
we shall see in chapter five of the Devīpañcaśatika, translated here in Appendix
C, their maṇḍala is a red circle surrounded by twelve others (fl. 59y3)’

(Sanderson 2006b: 21 n. 55). We find the same in the Kālīkulakramārcana.

According the Trikasadbhāva, as reported by Abhinava in Chapter Thirty-one,
Krama worship is incorporated into Trika by placing the twelve circles around

the centre into the Trika triple Trident Maṇḍala.

This reduplicated oneness is also within the centre, where the opposites
are. As we have seen, they can be male and female. In the CMSS, Kṛśodarī — the
Old Hag — is paradoxically identified with the lovely youthful Kumārī in the
centre (249). She is mentioned in this role right at the start, so it is not just a
detail or a stray possibility. The pair identified with the Goddess of Time
symbolize, no doubt, that her Time is pliable, just as her nature is inscrutable
(anākhya).

Note that the Void in the centre is registered here literally as an absence,

just as it is by Abhinava. We find a list of the names of the Kālīs. Although they
are the same as in the earlier sources, they are only twelve. The last one — the
thirteenth — is not counted amongst them. The ‘thirteenth’ in the centre is not
mentioned at all, even though it is repeated in numerous ways that the shining
brilliance of the luminous deity in the centre is the Twelve Kālīs. The essential

nature and activity of Kālī is to withdraw the world of death and decay back into

the Void of the eternal plenitude of her pure divine consciousness — the Absence
in the centre. The scriptures astound the reader with imageless images of Voids
flowing into emptiness, generating emptiness, consuming emptiness,
contemplated by astonished yogis who with the awesome audacity (sahasa) of
the devastating power of the Void witness the destruction of all phenomenal,
mortal existence in an immensely powerful implosion that gobbles everything

up in a flash of Light that shines with dazzling brilliance.
' CMSS 7/172.

. dhatte yan mukurāvaliyyatikaravyaktaika-vaktropamaṁ śāktaṁ cakram apakramam

paramayā devyā tad iddhaṁ numaḥ 27cd Quoted by Sanderson (2006b: 23-24 n. 62)

' See TĀ 31/52-58ab and notes.

' The Pratyabhijñā accordingly couples the Light of consciousness (prakāśa) with its

pulsing radiance (sphurattā), which is made up of its innumerable ‘shinings’ (ābhāsa)

that constitute its manifestation (vyañjana). Given the essential similarity here between
Pratyabhijñā and early Krama doctrine, we would expect this term to appear in the early

scriptural sources. But unfortunately, it does not, although the notion it conveys
certainly does.

TANTRĀLOKA

The scriptures tirelessly intensify the vision with ever deepening and
expanding planes of wonder.' The yogi thus rushes along this via negative,
which here, in this most secret and internal process — Krama — is the tradition —
Krama teaching and apocalyptic power of transformation. The language is
mysterious, as is the reality and the experience it teaches. As we read, we are
repeatedly mystified and find ourselves grasping for meaning, when we should
instead be letting go and face the horror of Kāla — Death and its power — Kālī to
discover that this, the End of all endings, is the beginningless Eternity that
engulfs time — kāla — and its power — Kālī, even as it is its source. Unconfined
Space (ākāśa), the Sky (gagana, kha, vyoman), the Place (sthāna) without
location, plane (pada) beyond Being and Nonbeing, Void (sūnya) and
Emptiness (śūnyatā); such is the Womb (garbha) of the One Who is pregnant

with the Void (garbhiṇī). This the Supreme Sun (paramārka) that unfolds like a

lotus, the expansion of Emptiness into Emptiness of the Year of the Twelve
Suns, the Eternity of the perpetual recurrence of timeless Time. For those who

do not know it, their existence severed from this, the Void of their true nature, it

is recurrent death. For those who are true yogis, Skyfarers in the Void of their
pure consciousness nature, it is eternal life.
The influence of the Kālī Krama is strongly felt in the later Kubjikā
Tantras, although it is unknown to the Kubjikāmata, the earliest Kubjikā Tantra.
By the time we reach the Ambāsaṁhitā, the Kālīs appear a couple of times in the
Kubjikā sources. In the Māyāstava (chapter 19 of the Ambāsaṁhitā), Kubjikā as
Mahāmāyā is praised as the thirteenth Kālī in the centre of the circle of twelve.
Moreover, it is stated there that Kubjikā revealed the Kālī Krama to the last of a
lineage of the Nine Siddhas who transmitted the Kubjikā Tantras. In the
Kumārikākhaṇḍa of the Manthānabhairavatantra,

Kubjikā’s alter ego is

portrayed in a few places as Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī Kālī. The Trika was a major

component of the Kubjikā transmission right from the start. In the Kubjikāmata,

the earliest Kubjikā Tantra, this is clearly evidenced by the fact that six of its
eighteen chapters are drawn from the Tantrasadbhāva, a Trika Tantra, although
it was not influenced by the Kālī Krama.
It is clear that the Kubjikāmata belongs to a later stage of development
of Kauḻism, because of the primary importance it gives to Matsyendranātha and
his disciples. It refers to their tradition as the ‘pūrvāmnāya’ — the ‘first’ or
‘preceding tradition’, in relation to which the Kubjikā Tantras are the
‘paścimāmnāya’, that is, the ‘subsequent’, ‘last’ or ‘final tradition’. The
Kubjikāmata does link Kubjikā to Kālī, but not to the Kālī of the Kālī Krama,
whereas the Kubjikā tradition that developed in the Manthānabhairava and
continued to grow throughout it into the later Kubjikā Tantras absorbed the Kālī
Krama. It is possible that this happened due to the influence of later forms of
Trika that had integrated the Kālī Krama into themselves. Whether this was so
or not, we know that it is a relatively developed form, as it characterized as the
Uttarāmnāya in the Yogakhaṇḍa (1) of the Manthānabhairava. These are
markers of development. There are others in the CMSS that foreshadow later
developments. One is particularly evident. The eight times eight Bhairavas of
the earlier sources here develops into ‘the knowledge of Vāmā’, consisting of
' Cf. ŚSū 1/12 viṣmayo yogabhumikāḥ — the planes of union (yoga) are wonder.

APPENDIX B CHAPTER FOUR

sixty-four energies, with herself as the sixty-fifth. We may take this to be a
precursor of the fully developed Krama, in which these energies are
systematically deployed in Five Assemblies (pañcacakra) of the later
Kramanaya. There, as we shall see, the sixty-four energies are deployed into
five spheres governed, from above to below, by Vāmeśvaṁī, Khecarī, Dikcarī,
Gocarī and Bhūcarī, which is a major feature of the final fully developed form

of the Krama system Kṣemarāja sponsored. '

However, the central feature of the Kālīkrama at this earlier stage is the

cycle of Twelve Kālīs, emitted and consumed by Kāli in the centre. It is this that
Niṣkriyānanda expounds in his hymn of fifty verses. The goddess is twelvefold,
as are the twelve suns in the yearly cycle, a view known to Abhinavagupta, who
also refers to it in his presentation of the Twelve Kaālīs.' Here this feature is so
strongly emphasised that the teaching is the Transmission of the Sun
(bhānavīkrama), because the energy of Kālī is configured in this way. Kālī’s
lunar nature thus takes second place to her solar one. This is the sphere of the

energies of the Inexplicable, which is the cycle of energies beyond the cycle of
creation, persistence and destruction that consumes them into itself. This is the
Skeleton of Time that Kalī, twelvefold, consumes.

Let us turn now to our text.


CHAPTER SEVEN OF THE CIÑCIṆĪMATASĀRASAMUCCAYA
--------------------------------------------------


Bhairava said:

punar anyaṁ pravakṣyāmi āmnāyagharam uttamam [gh: ghanṇa-] |
sāntasvarodayaṁ [k kh gh: -daya] padaṁ janmādhāraṁ tu [k: ti; kh gh: ]

khaṇḍinīI 155 ||

tatroditā devīkalā [k kh gh: devi-] kālī kaulikabhakṣiṇī
[gh: kailika-] |
36b gh) kaulācāraṁ kaulagarbhaṁ [k: kaula rbhaṁ] kaulodayaṁ [k kh gh: daya] trikaulakam || 156 ||
tasmāt kauleśvarī devī kumārīkulabhakṣiṇī |
I will tell (you) again something else, namely, the most excellent House

(ghara) of the (northern) tradition. The energy of the goddess, Kālī, who
consumes the Kaulika and (is Kuṇḍalini who is) Khaṇḍinī (who destroys all
things), arises within the Foundation of Birth, the plane of the arising of (the

energies of) the letters (svarodaya) (beginning with A and) ending with S. She is

Kaulācāra, contains Kaula, is the arising of Kaula, and (so) is the triple Kaula,
and so she is the goddess Kauleśvarī who devours the Kumārīkula. (155-157ab)

' See Dyczkowski 1987: 129 ff., where these five spheres are explained as planes of

consciousness, perceptions, senses and their objects. The Mahānāyaprakāśa of
Arasiṁha follows a different tradition, where these five constitute the Five Currents
(pañcavāha). They are called 1) Vyomavāmā 2) Khecarī 3) Bhūcari 4) Saṁhārabhakṣiṇī
and 5) Raudreśvarī. See MNP by Arṇasiṁha v. 25-50ab.

' See TĀ 4/146cd.
' Verses 155 to 158ab are missing in MS G.
! ‘Kaula’ is the aggregate of Twelve Kālīs that has arisen from Kula, i.e. Kaulikīśakti,
in the centre. The goddess is triple as Kaula, the emergence of the Twelve Kaālīs from

TANTRĀLOKA

20a k) tatrāvatāraṁ [k: tatravatāraṁ] kṛtvā tu yatrastho [all: -sthā] tamaso

muniḥ [k gh: mumi] |I 157 II
khaṇḍinīṣṭhānaparamaṁ niṣkriyājñānamuttamam [k kh gh: niṣkriya-] |
kathitaṁ krodharājasya vedhasaṁkramanaṁ [gh: -gaṁ] kṛtam || 158 II
paramāmnāyadivyaughaṁ [k g gh: -divyoghaṁ] karṇāt karṇaṁ [all: karṇa]
kramaṁ sthitam |
38b g) slokadvādaśanīrbhinnaṁ |[k gh: snokadvādaśanibhinnaṁ; kh g:

slokadvādaśanibhinnaṁ] saṁpradāyapariṣphuram || 159 |I

guruvaktragataṁ devi svānubhūtyaikalakṣaṇam |
kālikaṅkalasaṅkrāmaṁ [all: kāliḥ-; k;: -saṁkrāma; kh: kaṅkalasaṁkrāma; gh:
kakarasaṁkrãmaṁ; g: kalasaṁkrāma] anākhyapadam uttamam [k kh gh:
anākṣa-; g: -papamuttamaṁ ] || 160 ||
She came down into the world, where Tamasa Muni (that is, Durvāsa,

also called Krodharāja) resides. It is the supreme place of Khaṇḍinī. He was told
the Niṣkriyājñāna of Krodharāja once the transmission brought about by
piercing (of the inner centres) (vedhasaṁkramana) had been completed. This is
the Divine Current (divyaugha) of the supreme tradition that is transmitted by
word of mouth. The radiant manifestation of the tradition is not separate from
the (mantra called) Twelve Verses. It is the (oral) transmission of the
Kālīkaṅkala (tradition) located in the teacher’s mouth. O goddess, its sole

characteristic is personal experience (svānubhiūti), and it is the excellent plane of
the Inexplicable (anākhya). (157cd-160)
devyuvāca
kālibhedaṁ [all: -bheda] kathaṁ nātha dvādaśaiva kathaṁ smrṛtam |

mukhāmnāyaṁ [k kh gh: -nāya; g: mukhyāmnāya] kathaṁ nātha kenopāyena
saṁkramam || 161 I|
kathayasva [gh: -śva] prasādena yena tuṣyāmy ahaṁ prabho [gh: prabhā] |
37a gh) bhairava uvāca
Śṛṇu devi pravakṣyāmi kālikākramam uttamam || 162 |
18b kh) dvādaśaiva paraṁ bhadre [g: dre] saṁpradāyaṁ vadāmy aham |
aviluptaparāvyāptir bhedabhinnā [all: -vyāptibhedabhinnā] tu svaprabhā [k kh

8 -bhāṁ; gh: -bhaṁ] || 163 ||

.atītavīśrāntir
yoganidrā
|[kg:
-viśrāntiyoganidrā;
gh:
vācamatītaviśrāntiyoganidrā] guror mukhāt |
labhyate [all: labhate] ca mahājñānaṁ [g: -na] vidyārājena suvrate || 164 |
39a g) krodharājena vikhyātaṁ paścād vidyāṁ parityajet [k: paritejet; gh:

paritejet] |


The Goddess said:

the unity of consciousness, and contains them (i.e. Kaula) as that unity. This emergence
and submergence which is not true action (niṣkriyā) is the manner Kaula operates —

Kaulācāra.

APPENDIX B CHAPTER FOUR
O Lord, how is the Kālī division? How is it said to be (the tradition of

the) Twelve? O Lord, what is the oral tradition (concerning this)? By what

means is it transmitted? O Lord, tell me by (your grace,) if you are satisfied with
me. (161-162ab)


Bhairava said:

Listen O goddess, I will tell you the most excellent Kālikākrama. O fair

one, I will tell (you that, namely,) the tradition of the Twelve (Kaālīs), which is

supreme. It is the eternal supreme pervasion, the self-luminous light divided into
various divisions. It is the repose beyond Speech, the sleep of Yoga. O lady of

good vows, (this) is the great knowledge™ one obtains from the teacher’s mouth

by means of the King of Vidyās.” It has been explained by Krodharāja.
Afterwards (once having attained realization), one should abandon (?) the

Vidyā. (162cd-165ab)

kathayāmi mahājñānaṁ [gh: -jñāna] niṣkriyaṁ [k g gh: nikriyaṁ; kh: niḥ

kriyaṁ] śṛṇu suvrate || 165 II

ravipradīpako loke sūryamadhyād vinirgataḥ |
ravir antargato bhānur [k kh: bhānu g: g: bhāṇu] bhāsayaty akhilaṁ jagat ||

166 I

bhānavī kaulinī yā sā tatpuñjabharitaṁ [all: -paritaṁ] jagat |
tatrotpannā mahāmantrā [kh: mahāmāntrā] bhairavāṣṭāṣṭayoṇayaḥ ][g: yodayaḥ] lI 167 I|
20b k) ravibhānumayī devī [g: devi] kauleśī [kh: -śrī] kulagahvarī|

37b gh) kṣobhānandā virāmā [gh: virāma] tu paśyate [kh: paṁśyate]
kulasantatiḥ [k g gh: -santati] || 168 II

I will tell (you) the great knowledge which is Without Action (niṣkriya).

Listen, O lady of good vows. The one who illumines the (immanent) Sun (ravi)

has emerged from the (transcendental) Sun (sārya). Ravi is the inner Sun that
illumines all the universe. (166) The universe is filled with the network (of the

rays of energy that emanate from) her, she who is Bhānavī Kaulinī. The great
mantras that have arisen there are the wombs (yoni) of the eight times eight
Bhairavas.” The goddess is Kaulesī, who is the Sun of the sun (ravibhānumayī),
she is the Abyss of Kula (kulagahvarī), the bliss of arousal (and also) repose,
she is seen to be the Kaula lineage (santati). (165cd-168)

mahāvyomārṇave śaive bhānavīkuṇḍamadhyataḥ [k gh: -madhyetaḥ] |
tatra pralīnāḥ [all: pralīnās] sarve te bhairavāṣṭāṣṭayonayaḥ || 169 ||
This is the definition of the Knowledge of Inaction (niṣkriyājñāna). Thīs is what is
taught here in what follows.

This is presumably Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī’s Vidyā. See TĀv ad 29/69-70ab and the

Appendix to Chapter Thirty.
Arka / Ravi is the Twelve Kālīs, the reflection (pratibimba) of Bhānu / Śūrya, the
thirteenth Kālī, who is the original image (bimba).

CMSS 7/166-167 = JY 4/4/11cd-13ab.

TANTRĀLOKA
bhānavīkuṇḍamadhye tu layacakraṁ sṣvabhāvataḥ |
39b g) vilīne [kh: vilone; g: valīne] svasvabhāvākhye [all:
tatṣvabhāvodayaṁ tataḥ || 170 II

-khyaṁ]

bhāvābhāvakṣayakṣīṇaṁ [k kh gh: -kṣayokṣīṇaṁ; g: -kṣoyokṣīnaṁ] yā cinoty
[g: yasvino-, anye: yaścino-] aśarīriṇaḥ |

sā cidā niḥsvabhāvatvād [k kh: niśvabhāvasvā; g: niṣvabhāvatvā; gh:
niścabhāvasvā] sūryakulakṛṣodarī [k kh: cchūryā-; g: chūryo-; gh: cchuryā-] |I
171 I

tatsvarūpoditaṁ cakraṁ cidbhānvarkagatisthitam [k g gh: -sthitaḥ] |
pratibimbam ivābhāti [k g gh: prata-] bimbagrāsaikalampaṭam [k kh: -padaṁ]

l1721|

na kulaṁ kaulinīśaktir na svabhāvodayaṁ tataḥ |
na saṁhãrasya saṁhãraṁ divyo ʻsau [all: dĩyyãsau] sarvabhogabhuk [gh: -tuk]

173 1|

38agh) icchā cinmātradharmeṇa [k: -dhanmeṇa] apṛthagbhāvavartinī |
AII these (mantras that are the) wombs of the sixty-four Bhairavas have

merged there into the middle of the hearth of the Sun (bhānavīkuṇḍa), which is
in the ocean of Śiva’s Great Sky. The Wheel of Merger is, by its very nature, in
the middle of the hearth of the Sun.
Once what is called one’s own (egoic) nature (svasvabhāva) has

dissolved away, its (true) essential nature arises. She Who perceives (the reality
of) the disembodied being which is free of destruction, Being and Nonbeing is

the (disembodied) energy of consciousness (cidā) thus, because it is devoid of
any (phenomenal) nature of its own (niḥsvabhāva), She is Kṛṣodarī (the Thin
One) of the Kula of the Sun (sūryakula). The Wheel (of the Twelve Kālīs) has
arisen from that essential nature, and it is established within the rhythm (gati) of
the Sun of the Sun (bhānvarka) of Consciousness. It shines as if it were a

reflection (pratibimba); its sole intent is to devour the original image (bimba).

(171-172)

Kaulinī śakti (is the inscrutable Anākhyā, she) is not Kula (the Twelve
Kālīs), nor is it (Kaula) the arising of one’s own nature, nor the withdrawal of
withdrawal. He is the divine enjoyer of all worldly experience (bhoga). The will
is essentially consciousness alone, and so does not exist separately apart (from
consciousness). Such is the emanation of the omnipresent one. (173-174ab)
Niskriyānanda and His Sexual Yoga
srsṣṭiḥ [all: sṛṣṭiṣ] sarvagatasyaiva saṁhāraṁ kathayāmi te || 174 ||

rasenānandajaṁ (> rasanā-) rūpaṁ yadā [g: padā; gh: yādā] grāhyena [gh:
grā na] grhyate |
tadā [all: yadā] pratyastamas tatra sa ca taṁ vrṛttigocaram [k: vṛrtti-; kh:
vrttiṁ-] II 175 |I
19a kh) 40ag ) kṣīnavṛttiḥ [k g: -vṛrttiḥ] pralīnatvāj jāyate |[g:
pralīnanvājāyate] paramādbhutam |
trikoṇaṁ tattrikoṇasthaṁ [k kh gh: ta-; gh: -stha] suśiraṁ suśirāgragam [k: grataṁ; kh: ṣuśirāgratam] l 176 ||

See above 156.

APPENDIX B CHAPTER FOUR

|[k gh:

yg:

strānya] śūnyamukhe

[k:

strāṅyamukhai] līnaṁ cittaṁ citāntaroditam [all: -rocitam] |

śūnyamukhai;

yg:

cidanādīmahāyonau [k kh: cipanādihāhānau; g: cidanādicidāhānau; gh:

grhaṁ II 177 II

kandendriyāṇi saṁyojya parasparavidhikrame |
hitvā [g: ditvā] bhāvaṁ na gṛhṇāti [k kh gh: grhlāti; g: grhnāti] yadā

bhāvāntaraṁ [k kh gh: -tara] citiḥ lI 178 II

tadā tat paramaṁ brahma ṣvasvabhãvaṁ pravartate |
etat kauḷāmṛtaṁ siddhaṁ [gh: siddha] yoginībhir udāhṛtam [k: -hṛtaḥ] || 179 |I
21a k) niṣkriyānandapādaiś ca bhūtale saṁprakāśitam [all: saṁprakāsitam] |
Now I will tell you (about) withdrawal (saṁhāra). If the entity (rūpa)
born of the bliss of tasting (rasanā) is perceived as an object of perception, it
then recedes there into the field of the activity (of the senses). Once this activity
has ceased because it has dissolved away (into consciousness), the supreme

wonder arises. There is a Cavity (ṣusira) at the extremity of the Cavity which is
the Triangle within that Triangle. The Void is merged into the mouth of the
Void, and the mind (citta) arises within the mind. . . . conjoining the senses of
the root (kanda) in the house of licking, which includes kissing and the rest, in
the rite (krama) of the mutual practice (vidhi) and, if abandoning one (emotive)

state (bhāva), the mind (citi) does not grasp another, then the supreme Brahman,
which is one’s own essential nature, manifests (pravartate). That, the yoginīs
say, is the Kaula nectar, which has been accomplished and has been revealed in
the world by Niskriyānanda. (174cd-180ab)

This appears to be a reference to saḍāracakra (see above, note 36 to Appendix A), the

hexagon formed by the superimposition of two triangles, one facing up and the other
down — male and female. The two are portrayed here as couples: the Cavity and the
mouth of the Cavity, the Void and the mouth of the Void, and, engaged in this cognitive

Yoga, they are Mind (citta) uniting with Mind (citta).

The bliss of Inaction (niṣkriyā) is being taught here. The term reminds us of
‘nirācāra, which is also considered to be the supreme state. Niṣkriyānanda revealed the
‘Kaula nectar” and how to drink it, which appears to be elevated ritual cunnilingus.

Reference to this practice is also found in the Jayadrathamala, that declares:

te vīra vīrarājānassadā [g: rājānaḥ sadā] melāpabhājanāḥ ||
ye pivanti sadā viṣṇuṁ [gh: vi ?] bhagaṁ cumvanti [[g: ?] ye sadā | JY 3/38/127cd-

128ab

‘Those are (true) heroes, kings of heroes, who (enjoy) union (melāpa) (with the

yoginīs), those who constantly drink Viṣṇu (i.e., wine) and always kiss the female
genitals (bhaga).”

The practice continued into the late period of Kaulism. Thus, the Yonitantra
assures us that a person who conjoins his mouth to the mouth of the Yoni and repeats the
goddeṣs’s mantra is purified from sin. But by offering the menstrual blood and seed with

mantra to the Yoni he becomes a son of the goddess Kālikā. Yonitantra 3/120. See also

p. 24 of the introduction by Schoterman to his edition of the Yonitantra.

TANTRĀLOKA

Vidyānanda, Niṣkriyānanda’s Kāpālika disciple,
38b gh) devyuvāca
kathitaṁ kasyaiva nātha [all: nāthaṁ ] niṣkriyānanda bhūtale || 180 |l
mahākālikrāmaṁ divyaṁ saṁkrāntaṁ [k gh: sakrāntaṁ] kasya saṁkramam [g:
maṁkramaṁ; gh: sakramaṁ ] |
bhairava uvāca
40b g) Śṛṇu devi [g: devī] pravakṣyāmi saṁkrāmaṁ yasya [g: pasya]
saṅṁkramam || 181 I|
śšīlācitir munivaras [k: silācitin munivaraṁ-; kh: silācitīy munivaraṁ-; g:
manivaraṁ-] tasya putras tapodhanaḥ [k kh gh: pūtratapodhanam; g:
putratayodhanaṁ] |
yogābhyāsarato [k g: -rataṁ; kh:
-jyāsarataṁ; gh: -tyāsarataṁ] devi siddhaḥ
[all: siddhaṁ] śāvararūpadhṛk [all: sāvara-] |I 182 ||
vidyānandeti vikhyāto [all: -taṁ] mahādhīravaraḥ [all:

-varaṁ] priye |

śmaśānavāsī [k kh: -vāśī; gh: smaśānavāśi] nityastho niśātanarataḥ [all: nisā-]

paraḥ [all: param] |I 1 83 II

siddhayogīndro [k kh g: -yogendra; gh: -yoyendra] vīraś [all: vīrāś] ca
cakracārarataḥ [k kh gh: -rati; g: -rata] priye |


The Goddess said:


O Lord, to whom did Niṣkriyānanda teach the divine and great

Kālikrama in the world, to whom was it transmitted, and who possesses the
transmission? (181cd)


Bhairava said:

Listen, O goddess, I will tell (you) about the transmission. The excellent
sage Śīlāciti, who possessed the transmission, had a (spiritual) son, rich with

austerity. Ó goddess, he was a Siddha devoted to the practice of Yoga, and bore
the appearance of a (wild tribal) Śābara. O beloved, known as Vidyānanda, he
was most profound and excellent. Always established (in himself), he lived in
cremation grounds and devoutly practiced vigilance at night (niśātana).
O beloved, he was an accomplished lord of yogis — a Hero, and was intent on

the Practice of the Assembly (cakracāra).” (182-184ab)

śivapīṭhaṁ |[g: -pīṭha] mahādevi [g: -devī] śrīśailaṁ [k g gh: -sailaṁ]
devatāpriyam [gh: priyeṁ] || 184 II
tasya uttaradigbhāge [gh: -vigbhāge] nānāśikharaparvate [k gh: -sikhara-] |
tatra hemamayī divyaguhā [all: divyaṁ-] siddhasurārcitā || 185 ||
39a gh) tatrārādhanakaṁ [all: -dhanataṁ] kṛtvā vidyāśikharam uttamam [k kh
gh: -saviram uttamaṁ; g: -seviram vattama ] |
E understand the the Practice of the Assembly (cakracāra) to be sexual union (melāpa)
with yoginīs and attendant behaviour.

karoti

APPENDIX B CHAPTER FOUR

|[gh:

kaloti]

bhaktiṁ

_([all:

bhakti]

yogīndro

([gh:

yogrīndro]

bhaktiṁ [all: bhaktīs] tīvratarāṁ [all: -rā] divyāṁ [all: divyā] kṛtvā
śāvararūpadhṛk [k kh gh: sāvara-; g: sāva rūpadhṛk] |
tasya |[gh: tasyan] tuṣṭaṁ munivaraṁ |[k: muniṁ-; g: munivara]
śrīmiṣkriyānandam [g: -niṣkriyo-] uttamam || 187 |I
41a g) amoghavāṇī tasyaiva saṁkrāmaṁ kālikākramam |
19b kh) vāmājñānaṁ tu kathitaṁ pañcaśadbhūmikākramam [k gh: -ṣad-; kh g: -

ṣaṭ-] | 188 II

O Great Goddess, Śrīśaila is a Śivapītha beloved and pleasing to the

deities. To the north of it, on a mountain with many peaks, is a divine cave made
of gold which is venerated by Siddhas and gods. Having worshipped the most
excellent peak of (all) Vidyās there, the lord of yogis practiced devotion,
(wild tribal) Sābara, he practiced a more intense form of divine devotion.

(Thus,) the excellent sage the venerable Niskriyānanda was pleased with him

and transmitted the Kālikākrama to him by his unfailing words. He told him

the knowledge of Vāmā, the sequence of fifty planes (corresponding to the
verses of his hymn). (184cd-188)
The Hymn of Fifty Verses to the Kālīs by Niṣkriyānanda
(Kālikākramapañcaśatika)
teṣāṁ bhedaṁ vadiṣyāmi [g: vadikhyāmīi] śrṛṇu sarvaṁ tu pārvati |
vibhaktodbhavacakrāntaṁ [k kh: vibhaktadbhava-; g: vibhaktyād-; gh:
vibhaktādbhava] gaganaṁ gaganoditam || 189 ||
dvādaśārkaprabhākālī [all: dvādaśāṅka-] vyomarūpā khabhakṣiṇī [k kh gh:
ścabhakṣaṇī; g: svabhakṣaṇī] |
sphuratkṣīṇā |g: sphurakṣīṇā] svayaṁ [all: svaraṁ] kṣīṇāt [k: kṣīnan; kh g gh:
kṣīṇan] tat [gh: tan; g: ta] kṣīṇaṁ [g: kṣvīṉṇaṁ] divyagocaram [kh: -śocaraṁ] ||

21b k) kramasaṁhārasaṁhāraṁ [g: kramaṁ-] pāramparyakramānugam |
I will explain the difference between them. O Paārvatī, listen to

everything.

The Void (gagana) that has arisen from the Void is within the Wheel of

the outpouring (udbhava), divided up (vibhakta) (into the Twelve Kālīs). The

form of the Kālī of the light of the Twelve Suns is the Void (of transcendence),
and She devours the Void (of immanence).
She manifests as waned away (kṣīṇā) and, having herself waned away

(kṣīṇa), the divine sphere wanes away. The destruction of the destruction of the
process (krama) (of manifestation) (kramasaṁhārasaṁhāra) has come down

through the line of teachers. (2) (189-191ab)

svakulaṁ [gh: svakṣala] svakulātītaṁ [gh: -kṣalā-] svapadaṁ svapadāntaram ||

191 1

Here Kālikākrama specifically means the sequence of twelve or thirteen Kālīs.

TANTRĀLOKA

39b gh) spṛṣṭvā kālikramaṁ divyaṁ uditaṁ oghamaṇḍalam [k: ūgha-] |

manonmanapadāntasthaṁ cidarkodayamaṇḍalam || 192 ||

tadbhāvabhāvitarasaṁ viśvaughasphuratejasam [k g gh: viṣvogha-; k kh gh: tekramaṁ MS g ends here] |
bhittvā [all: bhitvā] bodhapadaṁ divyaṁ bodhabhāskarasevitam [all: -vecitam]

l 193 11

drāvitaṁ cinmarīcibhiḥ [all: cinmarīcībhiḥ] pītvā tu rasam uttamam |

citsvarūpaparākāśaṁ [k: -rūpa rākāśaṁ] sadasadbhāvavarjitam || 194 ||
tadantare [all: tadantaraḥ] mahārasaṁ [k, kh, g: sara-] parākāśavijṛmbhitam
[k gh: parākāsa-] |
The Circle of the Current (ogha) (of the transmission) arises (and the

Sun of the Twelve Kālīs dawns) once one has touched one’s own Kula (of the

energies of the body, senses and mind), which is beyond its own Kula, its own
plane (of being), and what is within its own plane (of being), the divine
Kālīkrama.
Established on the plane Beyond Mind (manonmana), it is the circle of

the rising Sun of Consciousness (bodhabhāskara). It is the radiant energy of the
cosmic current (viśvaugha), which is the aesthetic delight (rasa) sanctified by

that state of being.
Once having pierced through the divine plane of consciousness which is
attended by the Sun of Consciousness, and once it is melted away by the rays of
consciousness, and having drunk the best of juices (rasa) (of aesthetic delight),

(one attains) the supreme Void, which is consciousness and is free of being and
nonbeing. Within it is the great juice (of aesthetic delight) (mahārasa) that has
expanded forth out of the Supreme Void (parākāśa). (5-6) (191cd-195ab)

antaḥsvollāsaviṣayaṁ [all: -ya] nānāvaicitryacitritam [gh: -citri ] || 195 I|

avināśaparābhūmiḥ [k gh: avināsa-; all: -bhūmi] ka alitejasamudbhavā [gh: va] |

anantā [all: ananta] guptaviśrāntā [all: saptaviśrānta] gaganoditacitprabhā

[all: -svabhām] || 196 I|

sphurattejovikāsaughā [all: -sogha] saṁkrāmantī [all: -nti] paśuṁ balā |
40a gh) bhagaṁ [all: bhaga] bhagapadātītaṁ mataṁ tanmatam uttamam || 197

kramaṁ kulākulāmnāyaṁ [all: kula-] yoginīyuktigocaram [all: yogiṇī-; gh: -rā]


(The Supreme Void) is the field (viṣaya) of one’s own inner outpouring,

and is diversified by many kinds of wonderful diversity (vaicitrya). The eternal

and supreme plane is born from the radiant energy (tejas) of Kālī.
(The supreme plane) is the endless light of consciousness that has arisen

in the Void (of consciousness) and hidden, it is at rest. It is the current of the

expansion (vikāsa) of vibrant radiant energy (tejas). Penetrating (saṁkrāmantī)
the fettered soul, She is (its inner) strength.

Beyond the Twelve Kālīs, when they have melted away by its own rays, it flows with
raṣa.
Here the Void is the Light that arises in Emptiness and is at rest.

APPENDIX B CHAPTER FOUR

It is the Yoni (bhaga), beyond the plane of the Yoni (of Māyā). It is the

teaching (mata) —that most excellent teaching. (The group of Twelve Kālīs) is
the Krama. The tradition of Kula and Akula (which is its source) is the field of
the contemplation (yukti) of the yoginīs. (9) (195cd-198ab)
kāmaṁ kāmāntaraṁ kāmaṁ tejas [all: tejaṁ] tejeṣu [kh: tejaṣu] maithunam ||

198 I

bhogaṁ bhogāntaraṁ bhogaṁ mataśaktiḥ [k kh: -śakti; gh: yukti] prakīrtitā

[all: -taḥ] |

rudraś ca rudraśaktiś (> rudrena rudraśaktyā) ca yaugapadyena mathitam [k
gh: yugapadmena bhaktitaṁ; kh: yugapadmena bhaṁktitaṁ] || 199 ||
sarudraṁ drāvakaṁ [k: drāvakhaḥ; kh: drāvakhaṁ; gh: -ka] khaṁ [k kh: ke]

khe [gh: ke] kaṅkālakulakaulikam [k: kaṅkākekulakaulike; kh gh: kaṁkokela

kukaulake] | ( 11)
Śaktipiṇḍadravāntasthaṁ [k kh: Sśaktimaṇḍa-; gh: muṇḍavravāntasthaṁ]
bhagayoge [all: bhābhayoge] śivāntake || 200 ||
20a kh) sapiṇḍaḥ [all: sapiṇḍdas] siddhyate rūpī rūpālayapadāntakṛt |
(Kālī, the energy of the Mata,) is Passion (kāma), the (divine) Passion
within (worldly) Passion, the act of union (maithuna), which is the radiant

energy (tejas) within all the energies. The energy of the Mata is said to be
enjoyment (bhoga), (spiritual) enjoyment within (worldly) enjoyment.
Churned simultaneously by Rudra and Rudra’s energy, the Void (kha),
which is the (supreme) Kaula (kaulika) (reality of) the Kaṅkāla Kuḻa (i.e., the

Twelve Kālīs) along with Rudra, melts (all things away) within the Void.”
It is within the flow (drava) of the body of energy (śaktipiṇḍa) (that
takes place) within Śiva in the course of the Yoga of the Yoni (bhagayoga). The

possessor of Form (rūpin) (of ultimate reality), endowed with that body (of

energies) (sapiṇḍa) and internalized within the Abode of Form (of ultimate
reality), is successful. (12) (198cd-201ab)

kulamūlottaraḥ |[all: ālamūlottarā] saṅgabodhottarottarāntaraḥ [k kh:
vottarottaratāntaraḥ; gh: -voddharottaratāntaraḥ] || 201 ||

22a k) rudraśaktisamāveśāt siddhokto ‘ʻmaraśāsane [all: -sāsane] |

guruvaktragataṁ jñānaṁ labhyate svamate mate || 202 |
bodhabhāskaravijñānaṁ karṇāt karṇe [kh: karṇa] krame sthitam |

Beyond the root of Kula, it is within that which is beyond the beyond of

consciousness of the union (of Rudra and His energy). He is said to be a Siddha

in the Immortal Teaching by virtue of the penetration of Rudra’s energy.

The knowledge (of Inaction) in the teacher’s mouth is obtained within

the Mata of one’s own school (mata). It is the knowledge of the Sun of

Consciousness that belongs to the oral transmission. (14) (202-203ab)
antargagane yā kācit [all: kāviṉ] saṁvidānandanandinī|| 203 ||

40b gh) tatsvarūpaparollāsavikāse [kh: tatstha-; all: -saṁ] sphurat kaulinī |
The Void is the Twelve Kālīs, the world, and the source and end of the Twelve Kālīs.

TANTRĀLOKA

kaulakaṅkālakalayā [kh: -kaṅkola-] grāsaghasmararūpinī||204 ||
kālī kālāñjanī bhīmā dvādaśoditabhānavī [k: -sobhitabhānakī; kh: bhitabhānakī; gh: dvādasodita-] |
kramākramaṁ [all: kramātkrama] paraṁ kramaṁ [k kh: paraṁ krāma; gh:

paraṁ krãmaṁ ] saṁkrāãmaṁ kãlikākramam || 205 ||

sphuraty antargatā [all: -gato] ghūrmir anākhyaṁ [all: ghṛrmmira-] spandam
urtamam | (1T)

Kaulinī is that certain (inscrutable one) who delights in the bliss of

consciousness shining vibrantly within the inner Void, which is the expansion
(vikāsa) of the supreme outpouring of that essential nature.
As the energy of Kaula Kaṅkāla, She voraciously consumes
(grāsaghasmara). Kālī is the energy of the Sun (bhānavī) consisting of the

twelve risen (suns). Terrible, she manifests Time (kālāñjanī). (16) (203cd-

205ab)

Both process (krama) and its absence (akrama), it is the supreme
Krama, it is the Kālikākrama, which is (the enlightening) transmission
(saṁkrāma). It shines radiantly as the inner pulse of inebriation (ghūrmi), the
supreme and inexplicable (anākhya) vibration (spanda) (of consciousness).

(205cd-206ab)

cidaciccakramadhyastho [all: ~krama stho] yoganidrānubhāvitaḥ [all: -

mubhāvitaḥ] || 206 ||

śūnyāśūnyāntaragataḥ sa [all: śūnyaṁśūnyāntaragato na] vindati kulātmakam |


antargalitaciddhāmasvabhāvapadasaṅṁvidaḥ [all: -cidvāma-; k kh: -saṁ daḥ]

I|207 1

asau [gh: anau] parāparollāsaḥ [k kh: pammaparollāsa; gh: pamyaparollāsa]
kālicakravijrmbhitaḥ |
Located between the cycles (cakra) of consciousness and the
unconscious, it is sanctified by the Sleep of Yoga (yoganidrā). He who is in
between emptiness (śūnya) and fullness (aśūnya) attains the Kula nature.
It is the supreme (transcendental) and inferior (immanent) outpouring
that has expanded out as the Wheel of Kālī of the consciousness which is on the
plane of one’s own nature, the abode of consciousness that has inwardly melted
away. (19) (206cd-208ab)

brahmādidevatāḥ [all: -tās] sarvā [all: sarvān] bhairavānte [all: -vānta]

prakīrtitāḥ [all: prakīṛtitam ] || 208 II
līyate ca paraṁ tejaḥ [all: teja] kālavahnighanīkṛtam [gh: -vāhna-] |
41a gh) citprakāśaṁ [k: cipakāsa; kh: -sa; gh: cidākāsa] paraṁ [gh: para]
guhyaṁ uditaṁ kulabhãskaram l| 209 ||
dvādaśāraṁ sutejāḍhyaṁ [gh: sutejāghṁ] bhūrisūryasamaprabham |
jīvasya jīvanaṁ [all: jīvasañ] jīvaṁ prakāśayati tanmayam [all: tanmanaṁ] ||

210 l|
tenaiva yuktibhedena paśur vedhayate [k gh: pasuṁvedhayate; kh: paśu-]
balam |
śivadhāmāntare [all: śivādvāmāntaraṁ] devi sahasoditabhāvanā || 211 ||

APPENDIX B CHAPTER FOUR

haṭhakramaparāśaktir vedhayet [k: haṭhakramyaparāśaktivedhayes; kh gh:
haṭha parā-] mānavigraham |
All the deities from Brahmā onwards are said to be within Bhairava.
The supreme radiant energy (tejas) dissolves away, made dense by the Fire of
Time.
The light of consciousness, the supreme secret, is the risen Sun of Kula.

It has twelve rays and, endowed with beautiful radiant energy, it shines like
many suns.

It is the life of the living being, and it illumines the living being, which

is of that same nature. In this same way, it causes the fettered soul (and its)

power (bala) to be pierced (with its energy).

Contemplation born of Audacity (sahasa) is within Siva’s abode. The

supreme energy of the Process of Forceful (Realisation) (haṭhakrama) should

pierce through the form of cognition (mānavigraha) (and illumine it).

(208cd-212ab)

vyomātītaṁ vyomapadam uditaṁ [gh: -mudinaṁ] bhānavīkramam || 212 ||
jvālāsahasratejāḍhyaṁ trailokyaṁ grāsaghasmaram |
22b k) 20b kh) tridhāmodayamadhye [k gh: -mādaya-; kh: -mādayamakhya] tu
cittejaparabhāvitaḥ || 213 ||
nirviṣaṁ viṣam ākramya kālakūṭavibhakṣitam [k kh: -taḥ] |
kulaṁ kulākulāmnāyaṁ rasaṁ rasasamudbhavam [k kh: rayasamudbhavaṁ] l||

214 ||
padaṁ padãpadãttaṁ [all: padapadã-] sthãnaṁ [all: sthãna] kaulikam
uttamam |

The Liturgy of the Sun (bhānavīkrama) transcends 1) the Void and is 2)

the risen plane of the Void. It is rich with the radiant energy of a thousand fires.

It is the voracity of the devouring (grāsa) (consciousness that consumes) the

three worlds.
It is supremely sanctified by 3) the radiant energy (tejas) of
consciousness which is in the middle of the arising of the Three Abodes, once
having penetrated into the Poison (i.e. pervasion ~ viṣa) which is without

poison, digested by the Peak Syllable of Time (i.e. HRĪṀ).

The plane beyond both (the sphere) with planes (and levels) and that

without is the excellent location (sthāna) of Kula. It is Kuḻa, the tradition of
Kula and Akula, the juice (of aesthetic savour) (rasa) born of the juice (of
aesthetic savour). (26) (212cd-215ab)

garbhasthā garbhaṇĩ garbhã pañcagarbhaprasũyinĩ || 215 l||
41b gh) ekā siddhis triyoniś ca [all: siddhitrayonī ca] udyogakramamālinī [gh:
-krama linī] |
svarādivarṇavimalaṁ sthānaratavibhakṣitam || 216 ||
tadviśrāmaparābhūmiḥ kālitejaḥprakāśitaḥ |
Five more triads follow, marked by numbers as here. Above in 156cd, this triad is
called the Triple Kaula. The triadic form is differentiated (sakala) and the single form
undifferentiated (niṣkalā).

TANTRĀLOKA

bodhā bodhayate bodhaṁ svabodhāt paribodhitam [all: para-] I| 2177 ||
cakracāravibhedena [gh: cakrācāra-] saṁkrāmanti parasparam |

Mālinī of the Process of Exertion (udyogakrama) is the one (supreme)

accomplishment (siddhi) with three sources (triyoni). She is 1) the Womb
(garbhā) 2) residing in the Womb (garbha); she is 3) the pregnant (energy of

the) womb (garbhiṇī), who gives birth to five wombs (i.e., KHPHREṀ).
It is pure with all the letters, beginning with the vowels, and the one
devoted (rata) to (that) place has been consumed. The supreme plane of its

repose is illumined by the radiant energy of Kālī.

(She is) 1) the energy of consciousness (hodhā) that awakens 2) the

consciousness that has been awakened by 3) one’s own consciousness. They
penetrate into one another in consonance with the variety (vibheda) of the
movement of the cycle (of Kālīs) (cakracāra). (29) (215cd-218ab)

svabhūmibhūmim ākrāntaṁ [all: -nta] khecaram ūrdhvakham uttamam [k kh:
khecanmūrddhakha-] (one syllable too long) || 218 II

tadvadvīryāvabhāṣsena [gh: -vabhāse ] piṇḍaṁ [all: pinda] spandataraṁ [all:

piṇḍataraṁ] gatam |

kālākālaṁ [all: -kāla] svakālaṁ ca tyaktvā [k: tyaktyā; gh: bhaktyā] viśrāntayet
[k kh: -yen; gh: -yas] sukhe [k kh: mukhaṁ,; gh: sukhaṁ] | 219 l|

tatsukhe [all: tatsukhaṁ] krīḍate yogī spṛṣṭvā cittejamaṇḍalam |
rūpārūpāntaraṁ rūpaṁ svarūpaṁ rūpavarjitam || 220 ||
bhāvābhāvavinirmuktaṁ sarvatoditaniṣkalam [gh: -la] |
tatroditā parā devī kālī kaṅkālabhakṣiṇī || 221 ||

42a gh) kaṅkālakandalaṁ pātraṁ pītvā [gh: pītyā] vyomāmṛtodbhavam |

(Bhairava) the Skyfarer is the upper, most excellent Void, pervaded by
the plane of the plane of its own (inherent nature). The body (piṇḍa) (of
energies) pulsates more intensely (spandatara) by the manifestation of that
vitality.
1) Once having abandoned time (and its opposite), 2) the absence of
time (akāla) as well as 3) one’s own time, one should bring (all time) to rest

within bliss. Once having made contact (sprṣrvā) with the sphere of the radiant
energy (tejas) of consciousness, the yogi sports in that bliss. (31) (218cd-220ab)
1) One’s own form, 2) devoid of form, is 3) the form between form and
its absence (arūpa). The undifferentiated reality (niṣkala) is everywhere
manifest (udita), free of Being and Nonbeing.

1) Once having drunk from the vessel of the sprout (kandala) of the
Skeleton born of the nectar of the Void, 2) Kālī, the Supreme Goddess who
devours (the Kula of) the Skeleton (kaṅkāla) (of mortal existence), has arisen
(uditā) there. (33) (218cd-222ab)

ghūrmitā vamitā sā [k: ya; kh gh: ye] ca tena viśvasamudbhavam || 222 ||
The triadic consciousness dissolves away into pure consciousness at rest. (230cd231ab (41))
Cf. below, 228cd-229a (40). This is why this Kālī is called Kaṅkāla Kālī, and the

tradition relating to her is the Kaṅkāla Kula.

APPENDIX B CHAPTER FOUR

nijadhāmasvarūpastho yogī yogabalāvṛtaḥ [all: yogapalā-] |
khakandarasam ākṛṣya [all: ka- -raso kṛṣya] mahākramavicārakaḥ || 223 ||

paraṁ

bhuktvā

|gh:

parodbhavam ḷ

bhuktyā] paraṁ piītvā paraṁ

[gh:

evatṁ samaraso [all: samarasaṁ] bhūtvā kālikramavicārakaḥ || 224 ||

kalpāntakalpitaṁ
.([gh:
kulakalpavikalpitam |

kalpāntavalpitaṁ]

kalpaṁ

[k

kh:

3) She is made to pulsate (ghūrmitā) and is emitted (vamitā), and so the
universe has come into being. The yogi, enveloped in the power (bala) of yoga,
resides in the essential nature of his own abode.
Absorbing (into himself — ākṛṣya) the juice (rasa) of the root of the
Void, he contemplates the Mahākrama. 1) Having eaten the Supreme, 2) having
drunk the Supreme, and 3) having seen the Supreme, the Supreme arises.
He who contemplates the Kālīkrama, having become one (samarasa) in
this way, the aeon (kalpa) is conceived within the aeon. It is conceived
(vikalpita) by the conception (kalpa) of Kula (the Twelve Kālīs). (223-225ab)

23a k) kālicakram abhedaṁ ca uditāvyaktamaṇḍalam || 225 ||
sthūlaṁ [all: sthūla] sūkṣmaṁ tathā śūnyaṁ [gh: śūnya]

tricaitanyaṁ [all: -tanya] layaṁ gatam [all: -gataḥ] |
21la kh) tatra dhāmoditā kācid viśvākhyā [k gh: visvākhya; kh: -khya]
sumarīcinī || 226 ||
bindunādakṣaye kṣīṇe sthāne citpadamaṇḍale |
bhāvayed divyayoniṁ |[all: -yonī] ca siddhānāṁ pañca garbhiṇīm [all: -

garbhinĩ] l| 227 II
mahākālakalāntasthāṁ [all: -tasthā] kālacakreśvarīṁ [all: kālacakrarī] kalām

[all: kalā] |

The Wheel of Kālīs is the oneness (abheda) which is the risen (udita)

Sphere of the Unmanifest (avyaktamaṇḍala). 1) Gross, 2) subtle and 3) void —
(this) triple consciousness has dissolved away.
A certain (power) with beautiful rays who is called ‘all things’ has
arisen there (in that) abode when, with the waning away of 1) the Drop and 2)
Sound, 3) the Place (sthāna), which is the sphere of the plane of consciousness,

has waned away.
Contemplate the divine Yoni, who contains within herself the five
Siddhas (of the higher energies of consciousness and the elements) and is the
energy within the energy of the Great Time, that is, Kālacakreśvarī (the Misṭress
of the Wheel of Time). (39) (226-228ab)

tena kālīti vikhyātā [all: vikṣātā] kaṅkālakulabhakṣiṇī [all: -kalabhakṣiṇī] || 228
I
bhāvābhāvasvabhāvasya [all: -subhāvasya] ciccakracidacarvitaḥ |
svādasaṁbodhāhlādena [all: -bodha-] sphuratkālikramodayaḥ || 229 ||
bhramadbhramaranirghoṣaṁ [all: bhramadbhramara-] līyate yat pare pade !


tatra [all: tatroṅ] galitayogendro yoginīnāṁ [k kh: -ṇīnāṁ; gh: -ṇānāṁ] priyo
bhavet || 230 ||

TANTRĀLOKA

viśrāntabodhavimalo vedhayet khasvamaṇḍalam [all: ka-] |
Thus, she is known as Kālī who devours the Kula of the Skeleton (of
worldly existence). The essential nature of Being and Nonbeing is relished by
the consciousness of the cycle (cakra) of consciousness.

The Kālīkrama arises (as Kuṇḍalinī,) pulsing with energy by the delight
of the consciousness of (its) savour (svāda). It merges into the supreme plane
with the sound of a flying bee (bhramara).
The yogi who has dissolved away there is the beloved of the yoginīs.
Pure with consciousness at rest, he should pierce through his own sphere of the

Void. (41) (228cd-231ab)

kulakālivibhedena niśreṇikramamāśritaḥ [all: nisroni- -śritam] || 231 |

garbhãdivadgarbhapadaṁ |[gh: -givad-] bhagavat bhagadrāvakam [k gh:
bhagavam-; kh: bhagavas-] |
mahācitkamalānandaṁ [gh: nanda] vikasadbodhabhāskaram || 232 ||

hāsyalāsyavilāso yat [all: -lāsavilāghāt] tad bhrāmyābhrāmyacodakam [all:
bhrāmya-] |
cidādhārahathākarṣakālipūjākramārūḍhaḥ [k gh: cīrādārahathā--kramoruhaḥ;

kh: cīrādāra--kramoruha] || 233 ||

43a gh) hānādānavibhedena tyāgagrahaparikṣaye |
He abides in the tradition (krama) with no line (niḥśreṇi) by piercing
through the Kālī of the Kula (of the Twelve Kālīs). The plane of the womb
(garbha) is like the womb etc. and, like the Yoni (bhaga), it causes the Yoni to

flow.

The expanding (vikasat) Sun of Consciousness (hodhabhāṣskara) is the

bliss of the great lotus of consciousness. The (joyous) play (vilāsa) of humour
and dance impels (the universe,) mobile (bhrāmya) and immobile (abhrāmya).


When grasping and rejection, due to the distinction between taking up
and letting go, has ceased, (the yogi) is established in the liturgy of the worship

(pūjākrama) of Kālī, which is the forceful attainment (harhākarṣa) of the
foundation of consciousness. (45) (231cd-234ab)

nirīkṣamānas [all: -māna] tattvajño jñānārkaṁ [all: -rka] saṁprakāśayet [all:
-sayet] || 234 |
viśvākāroditaṁ

[k

kh:

viṣvā-;

gh:

visvā

roditaṁ]

cakraṁ

viśvasthityāvabhāsakam [k gh: visvāsthityā; kh: viśvāstityā; all: -vabhāsakaḥ] |


viśvasaṁhārakas tejas [all: visvasaṁhāriyaṁ] tattejogrāsaghasmaraḥ || 235 ||

vividhena vibhāgena
hathākramya-] | (AT)

|[all:

vimārgena]

haṭhakramam

anuttamam

[all:

The word vikāsa and derivatives is common in post-scriptural nondualist Śaiva

terminology, but is surprisingly rare in the Jayadrathayāmala. However, here it appears
several times.

The dynamism of the Kālīs itself is worship.

APPENDIX B CHAPTER FOUR
(Such a one,) who knows reality, lights up the Sun of Consciousness

(jñānārka) (even as) he is engaged in observing (all things). The Wheel in the

form of the universe is risen (udita) and illumines the abiding state of all things
(viśvasthiti).
That radiant energy (tejas) is universal destruction. It is the voracious
one who consumes (grāsa) that energy. The Process of Forceful (enlightenment)
(haṭhakrama) with its many divisions is the most excellent (anuttama).

(234cd-236ab)

karoti kramiko yogī sa [all: sad] yogī [k: yaugī] yoginīpriyaḥ [k kh: -priye; gh:

priyeḥ] l| 236 ||

23b k) khapakṣabhakṣiṇī [all: - kṣanī] bhakṣyalakṣakṣīṇā [all: bhakṣa-]
sulakṣaṇā [all: kṣalakṣagaḥ] |
sphuratghūrmigatānandanityoditavijrmbhitam
[k
gh:
-ratā-;
kh:
sphuratpurmiratā-] || 237 II
svasvabodhaṁ [all: -vodha] parāmrśya [all: -mṛkṣa] bhāvābhāvaviparyaye [k
kh: -vipayaye] |
The Krama yogi does this and is the beloved of the yoginīs. (The
goddess,) beautiful, and devoid of the objective sphere of enjoyment, devours
the polarity of emptiness (khapakṣa).
(She does this) in order to eliminate (viparyaya) Being and Nonbeing,
once having contemplated her own consciousness, which is the perpetually risen
expansion of the bliss inherent (gata) in the radiant pulse (of consciousness —

ghūrma). (49) (236cd-238ab)

viśrāntas tu [kh: viśrāntasut; gh: viśrāntastut] kvacid yukto [k: -yuktā; kh:
kracidyuktā; gh: kacidyuktā] guruvaktrāt [k: -vaktrā] tu labhyate [k gh:
rabhyate] || 238 ||
nādhor nordhve [k kh: nādhonorddhe; gh: nādhānorddhe] na madhye vā na
bāhyābhyantare `pi [k gh: vāhyebhyantarepi; kh: vāhyentarepi] ca [gh: ] |


43b gh) 21b kh) vismitaḥ [all: vismṛta] smaryate [k gh: smayate] yatra tatra
[gh: tatrā] kālikramodayaḥ || 239 |
śrīniṣkriyānandanāthena śāvarenaiva [all: sāvarasaiva] bhūtale |
uktā pañcāśikā [all: -sikā] devi kālikākramam uṭtamam || 240 ||

The (yogi) intent (on this process — yukta) rests somewhere (in some

inscrutable place) and obtains (this teaching) from the teacher’s mouth. neither

below nor above, neither in the middle, within nor outside. (50) (237cd-238)

The Kālikrama arises wherever the astonished (yogi) recollects (it). The
venerable Śāvara Niskriyānandanātha has uttered the fifty (verses and revealed)

the most excellent Kālikākrama on the face of the earth. (238cd-240)
devyuvāca

Śrutaṁ deva mayā sarvaṁ [kh gh: sarva] kālikākramapaddhatim |
siddhasaṁdohavijñānaṁ pāramparyakramāgatam [k: pāraṁpaya-;
kramogatam] || 241 ||

kh:

TANTRĀLOKA

adyāpi [gh: ādyāpi] saṁśayo nātha tvayoktaṁ praśnapūrvakam [all: prasna-] |
dvādaśārkaprabhākālīnāmasaṁjñā [k gh: -sajñā] kathaṁ bhavet || 242 ||

etad ākhyāhi [k: prata-,; kh: pravadākhyā hi] me nātha mantrapūjāsamanvitam ḷ


The goddess said:

0O god, I have heard all the (teaching concerning) the liturgy

(paddhati) of the Kālikākrama, which is the knowledge of the extracted

essence (saṁdoha) of the (teachings of the) Siddhas, and has come down

through the tradition of the lineage (of teachers). But even now, I have a doubt,

O Lord, you mentioned this before the initial question. What are the names of
the Kālī who is the light of the Twelve Suns? Tell me that, O Lord, along with
their Mantra and rite. (243ab)

bhairava uvāca
śṛṇu devi pravakṣyāmi rahasyaṁ kaulikāgamam [gh: kolikā-] || 243 1|
gopanīyaṁ mahābhadre [gh: -bhaḍe] tathāpi kathayāmi te |
sr̥ṣṭikālī [k kh: -kāli] sthitikālī saṁhāraṁ ca tṛtīyakam || 244 ||

44a gh) raktakālī caturthī ca sukālī pañcamī smṛtā [k: -tāṁ; gh: -taṁ] |
yamakālī tathā ṣaṣṭhī [k gh: ṣastha] mṛtyukālī ca saptamī|| 245 ||
aṣṭamī bhadrakālī ca paramārkā nava smṛtā [all: smṛtāḥ] |
mahāmārtaṇḍakālī ca dāśamī parikīrtitā [all: -tāḥ] || 246 l|
ekādaśī rudrakālī mahākālī tu dvādaśī |
etad [gh: eted-] bhedakramaṁ devi nāmasaṁjñā prakīrtitā [all: -tāḥ] || 247 ||


Bhairava said:

Listen, O goddess, I will tell (you) the secret of the Kaula tradition
(āgama). O great auspicious one, it should be kept secret, but even so I will tell
you. (The twelve Kaālīs are) 1) Sṛṣṭikālī, 2) Sthitikālī, and 3) Saṁhārakālī, the
third, 4) Raktakālī is the fourth, 5) Sukālī, the fifth, 6) Yamakālī, the sixth, 7)
Mṛtyukālī, the seventh, 8) Bhadrakālīis the eighth, 9) Paramārkā (Kālī)is said
to be the ninth, 10) Mahāmārtaṇḍakālī is said to be the tenth, 11) the eleventhis

(Kālāgni) Rudrakālī and 12) Mahākālī, the twelfth. O goddess, this sequence of
the various (Kālīs) is said to be (the one of Kālī’s) names. (243cd-247)
svabhāvā [k: svasvadhā; kh: svasvavā] svasvarūpā ca vyomānte [gh: vyomante]
vyomabhakṣiṇī |
hrūṁ śrīṁ mantreṇa saṁpūjyā [all: saṁpūjya] dvādaśāre sadoditā [gh: -ta] l|

248 I|

madhye tu paramā devi kumārī kulabhakṣiṇī|
dvādaśānte [all: -śāntan] tu saṁpūjyā [all: saṁpūjya] pūrvoktavidhi vallabhe ||

249 I|

gurupaṅktiṣṭathā
[all:
gurupaktitathā]
pāramparyakramāgatā [all: -gatam] |

Here, this term refers to a yogic, not ritual, procedure.

[all:

pūjya]

APPENDIX B CHAPTER FOUR

bāhye [gh: -hya] tu madhye [gh: -dhya] pṛṣṭhe [all: pṛthve] ca evam eva

kramaṁ nyaset || 250 ||

Kaālī is the essential nature (svabhāvā) (of all things). Within the Void

(vyoman), she devours the Void. Perpetually risen in the twelve-spoked (wheel),
she should be worshipped (there) with the Mantra HRIṀ ŚRĪṀ. The supreme
goddess Kumārī, who devours the Kula (of the twelve Kālīs),is in the middle. O
beloved, she should be worshipped in the aforesaid way within (and at the end

of) the twelve (dvādaśānta). The lineage of teachers, that has come down in due

order through the tradition, should be worshipped then. One should deposit the
Krama (everywhere) in this way, externally, in the middle, and behind.

Appendix C
to Chapter Four

CHAPTER FIVE OF THE KĀLIKULAKRAMAPAÑCAŚATIKA,
--------------------------------------------------


also called the Devīpañcaśatika

The Sequence of Thirteen Kālīs
The next phase of development of the Kālīkrama is characterized by a
number of features. One is the emergence of independent Kālīkrama Tantras.
Another is the figure of Matsyendranātha, who is portrayed as the founder of
Kaulism, from which the Kālīkrama ultimately developed. Thirdly, the location
of the place where these Tantras were revealed. Niṣkriyānanda lived in Śrīśaila,
whichis in eastern central Indiain whatis nowadays Andhra. Now these Krama
teachings are revealed in Oḍḍiyāna, also called the Uttarapīṭha or Śrīpīṭha.
Characterized as an oral tradition, it is transmitted through a named lineage of
Siddhas and Yoginīs beginning with Matsyendranātha.
We have seen that the Kālīkrama, also called Kālīkula, is well known to
the Jayadrathayāmala, which incorporates it into its own teachings. However,
although it is a well-developed Kula, it is not yet associated with
Matsyendranātha. This association took place when the Kālīkula assumed an
independent status, with Tantras of its own. Matsyendra and his mythical

predecessors in previous aeons (yuga) are worshiped in the maṇḍala of the

teachers along with their consorts and the spiritual descendants of
Matsyendranātha as a prelude to the Kula ritual described by Abhinavain

CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE OF THE TANTRĀLOKA. A MAJOR SOURCE OF THIS RITUAL, CALLED
--------------------------------------------------

Ādḍiyāga,is the Mādhavakula, thatis, the fourth ṣaṭka of the Jayadrathayāmala.
The relevant passage is translated in an Appendix to Chapter Twenty-nine.
There is no mention there, or in any other parts of the Jayadrathayāmala, of
Matsyendranātha and associates. Even so, Abhinava begins his version of the
rite with the worship of the Gurumaṇḍala of the four Yuganāthas, thus
conforming the procedure of the Ādiyāga taught in the Mādhavakula to the later
Kaula rites that considered their first teacher to be Matsyendranātha. How far
this was Abhinava’s synthesis, or whether he was drawing from Trika Tantras is
not possible to say. None of the three that survive teach Ādiyāga, nor is the

Trika they teach linked to the Krama, thus rendering their Kaulism weak.

Jñānanetra, who founded the Kashmiri Kālīkrama, belonged to the
middle of the ninth century. Abhinava postdates him by over a century. It is not
clear to what degree the Kāḹīkrama had developed before him. Abhinava does
quote some works that, judging by their name and the context in which he refers
to them, belonged to that tradition. These include the Kālīkula and possibly the
Devīpañcaśatika. Important is the Ūrmikaulārṇava. This is a Kālīkrama Tantra
aṭtributed to Matsyendranātha, which has partially survived in two Nepalese
manuscripts (see bibliography). Abhinava quotes it several times. However,
' DP 7/13b: jñānaṁ śrīpīṭhasaṁbhavam |

See Gnoli 1999: 701.

APPENDIX C CHAPTER FOUR

Jayaratha quotes several more Kālīkrama texts that Abhinava would certainly
have read and most probably quoted, had they been available to him. Notable in

this respect is the Kramasadbhāva.

It is clear from the great attention Abhinava pays to the Twelve Kālīs
that he understood the teaching concerning them to be the fundamental one of
the Krama system he knew. Krama is the most elevated esoteric core of his
Trikakula. The goddess of the Krama, Kāḻasaṁkarṣiṇī, is called Beyond Parā
(Parātītā) in the Devyāyāmala of the Trika, even as she integrates the three
goddesses, Parā etc. of the Trika, into herself as Kālī who is Anākhyā — the

Inexplicable. The Twelve Kālīs are THE universal activity of consciousness

(sāmānyaspanda), THE cycle of consciousness (saṁvitcakra, saṁvitkrama) and
THE Wheel of Energies (śakticakra), the most excellent of all the wheels and

cycles. Thus, they are the culminating experience in all three categories of
practice.
Most of the features of the early teachings were carried over into the
next phase, in which independent Kālīkula Tantras arose. They were relatively
short and just a few. Those we have recovered include the Kramasadbhāva,
Ūrmikaulārṇava, and the Dvyardhaśatika which is derived from the
Yonigahvaratantra ‘brought down to earth’ by Śivānanda. We also have the
Kālīkulapañcaśatika that Jayaratha invariably calls the Devīpañcasṣaṭika. There
we find, for the first time, as far as we can tell, individual descriptions of the

Kaālīs. Before, the texts only supplied their names. As they are reflections of the

one in the centre, the visualized forms are all the same. Nonetheless, there are

significant differences in their character and behaviour. Thus, although short,
this was a very important Tantra of the Kālīkula, and Jayaratha quotes its
description of the Kālīs in full. Noteworthy is that these descriptions are not
visualizations of their iconic forms. Even so, in the same chapter five, it also

outlines how they are to be worshipped. Accordingly, the whole chapter has
been edited and translated in this Appendix.
In the DP, the outbursts of visionary experiences evoked in the Kālīkula
of the Mata of the Jayadrathayāmala settle down into a more clearly defined
theology of Kālī. Even so, the basis remains the same, namely, radiant visions of
Kālī’s luminosity and power as Śiva’s dynamic will_embodied in the
processions of Kālīs, marking the phases of the cycles of creation and
destruction. Again, there is no mention of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. Instead, as before, we
find Kṛśodarī in the centre, or the thirteenth in the series of Kālīs, that is,
Mahābhairavacaṇḍograkālī. As we have observed elsewhere, Śiva sometimes
appears as the Sun in the centre. In the citation below, he alternates with the
Goddess Bhāsā — the Shining One.
Again, in the following passage from chapter seven of the DP, we

observe, as we do in the Yonigahvara, the seed of the later fully developed

Krama system, here called ‘pañcārtha’, the Fivefold Reality. We notice its close

association with the Sun, that is identified here with Siva. Thus, the solar
associations found in the earliest form of the Krama, that is, the Kālīkula
teachings, continue into the second phase, marked by the emergence of
independent Kālīkula Tantras. The following passage from the DP is a good
example.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Śiva, the supreme cause, is Mahādeva, the Eternal Sun, the field of which
is beyond conception. He is beyond Śakti and is supreme bliss, free of qualities and
supports, unchanging, supreme, pure, free of cause and example, present within all

existing things, beyond the Void, free of defects, and omnipresent, the doer of all

things. Free, full of nectar and unconditioned, he is present in all living beings. O
supreme lord! By his awakening, his Kālikā has arisen spontaneously (svecchayā),
the one supreme power endowed with those same attributes. She is subtle,
supreme, tranquil, and delighted by supreme bliss. Śivā has arisen spontaneously
(svabhāvataḥ), stainless, she is (all that is) to be known. She is the Supreme
Goddess (parameśvarī) who, by her own will is (both) Transmental and With

Mind (samanā). (18-23cd)

The (power) that shares in Śiva’s attributes has arisen without (prior)

reflection (acintitā), like the light of the rays in the sun and (power) to burn
within it. It is Śiva’s will in the form of the Transmental and With Mind, (arisen
as) both dual and nondual. ‘l desire this and that spontaneously (anicchātaḥ lit.

‘without desire’) — that is this desire within Śiva, who is action that has arisen
as the supreme power who is the Transmental and With Mind.
And (that energy) With Mind generates the Five-fold Reality
(pañcārtha) within this universe. The Transmental, who is Śiva’s capacity (to do
all things - sāmarthya), bestows the most excellent knowledge. She, the
Supreme Goddess, then again spontaneously (svecchayā) devours the universe.
Its permutation is said to be the Light which precedes the mistress of the wheel
of rays. When linked to Moon, Sun and Fire, she generates the seeds of (her)
energies. Her form is one and, transcendent (nirālokā), is the supreme abode.


arajaḥ śāśvato bhānuḥ [k, kh: bhrāntaḥ] kalpanātītagocaraḥ |

śaktyātītaḥ parānando guṇāśrayavivarjitaḥ || 18 II
nirvikāraḥ paraḥ śuddho hetudṛṣṭāntavarjitaḥ |
sarvabhāvāntarasthaś ca vyomātīto nirāmayaḥ [g: nī-] || 19 Il
sarvagaḥ sarvakartã [kh, g: -rttā] ca sṣvacchando ‘mṛtanirbharaḥ [k, kh: svacchandā] |

39g-b) nirupādhir mahādevaḥ sarvabhūteṣvavasthitaḥ || 20 l|
43kh-a) tasyāvabodhāt paramā svecchayā parameśvara |

jātā tatkālikā śaktir ekā taddharmadharmiṇī
[g: tarddharmmadharmmīṇī] || 21 ||
sūkṣmarūpā [kh, g: śūkṣma-] parā śāntā paramānandananditā |

svabhāvataḥ śivā jātā vedyarāpā nirañjanā || 22 ||
unmanā samanā sā tu ṣvecchayā parameśvarī |

yathā raśmiprabhā [g: rāśmi-] sūrye [g: sūrya] bahnau ca dahanātmikā || 23 ||
acintitā samutpannā śivasya saha dharmiṇī |
samanonmanarūpeṇa śivecchā [g: śivacchā] dvayam advayam || 24 ||
tat tad icchāmy anicchātas tadiccheyaṁ [k, kh, g: -da] kriye [g: kriyo] śive |

saṁbhãtã [g: saṁbhãtãṁ tu [g: taḹ parã śaktiḥ [g: śaktij samanonmanarāpiṇī | 25 II

43kh-b, 40g-a) samanā caiva viśve ‘smin pañcārthānāṁ prasūyinī |
unmanā śivasāmarthyā [g: -sāmathyā] dāpayej jīñānam uttamam [k: darpayejjñāna-;
kh: darpayet jñāna; g: darppayejñāna-] || 26 ||

punaḥ sā grasate viśvaṁ svecchayā parameśvarī |

tadvivartaḥ [k, kh, g: -vivarta] smṛto jyotiḥ puñjacakreśipūrvagaḥ [g: puñjacakroṣi-] |l
27 |

kalābījāni sūte ca somārkānalasaṁyutā |
ekākārā nirālokā paradhāmasvarūpiṇī || 28 II

APPENDIX C CHAPTER FOUR
She assumes a state of oneness in the middle of one who possesses (her)

radiant energy. She shines present in multiplicity (nānākhya) like the light of

many suns. (That light) is not the moon, stars, it is not the light of the rays of
(the sun), the lord of the sky, nor is it the brilliance of lightning — (it is) is the
beautiful Sun of (the energy) With Mind, and that Light (bhāsā) is seen in the
belly (of consciousness) with the eye of knowledge that is the eye on the path of
opening (unmeṣa). She is not seen otherwise. All (things) shine due to her, Fire,

Moon, Sun and stars. As the division of Sun and Moon, she bestows the plane of

oneness. Thus, she who is the aggregate (kula) of rays and ferocious, the
Supreme One who has reached the final end of Kula, devours duality with the
Yoga of the Fire of (Universal) Destruction.’

In this passage, Supreme Śiva is portrayed as the Sun of consciousness.
His divine power, Kālikā (the Little Kālī), possesses all His divine qualities and
shares in His nature as pure Light (bhāsā). As such She is the ŚSun, the one light
which illumines all the lights of the universe — those in heaven, namely that of
the sun, during the day, the moon and stars at night, and the light of the fire on
earth. Indeed, the extreme brilliance of Kaālī is emphasized repeatedly in all
these Kālīkula sources. As the Shining One (bhāsā), she is the Inexplicable
(anākhyā). The Five-fold Reality (pañcārtha) of Emanation, Stasis, Withdrawal,

the Inexplicable and Illumination are the realm of immanence generated by
supreme consciousness With Mind. It is illumined by the Transmental energy
Beyond Mind of the same consciousness. The former the Void of immanence of

manifestation, the latter the Void of transcendence of its gnosis. The focus here,
as throughout, the Kālīkula, is on Kālī as the Void of consciousness which

consumes all Her own manifestations (‘shinings’) by Her light, which is so
bright that the lights of manifestation disappear into its brilliance that thus burns
them up like fire. The Sun is the most obvious natural symbol of this. For
centuries, the Sun of Brahman has been venerated as the One Light which shines
here below, as the Upaniṣads declare, in the domain of time and mortality, and
s0 behind which is the domain of the Immortal.
We turn now to our text.
śrībhairavyuvāca
Śrṛṇu vakṣyāmi tat sarvaṁ vakrād vaktreṣu yat [k, g: ya] sthitam |

akathyaṁ paramaṁ sāraṁ vācyavācakavarjitam || ḷ ||

anyaśāstropamāhīnaṁ durvījñeyaṁ durāsadam |

tejas tu [g: tra] yasya madhyasthā saikībhāvatvamāgatā [g: maikī-] |
nānākhyagā tu sā bhāti bhūribhānusamaprabhā || 29 ||
naśaśī tārakābhāvo nāsau vyomeśaraśmibhā |
na ca sā taḍitaḥ prakhyā citrabhānuṣamānasā || 30 ||

44kh-a) sā bhāsā jaṭhare caiva [k kh, g: naiva] dṛśyate jāānacakṣuṣā |

unmeṣamārgacakṣuṣe nānyathā dṛśyate tu sā || 31 ||
pradīpyante tayā sarve [g: sarvva] vahnicandrārkatārakāḥ [g: -tārikāḥ] |
40g-b) ravisomavibhāgena sāmarasyapadapradā || 32 ||

tenāsormikulā [g: tanā-] bhīmā [kh: bhāmā] dvaitabhāvasya bhakṣiṇī |
saṁhāravahniyogena kulaprāptagatā parā || 33 || DP 7/1 8cd-33

TANTRĀLOKA

nādyāpi viditaṁ yac ca [g: yavva] siddhānāṁ bodhaśālinām [g: -sālināṁ] |I 2 ||
pāramparyakramāyātaṁ saṁcarantaṁ mukhānmukham 1
tac chṛṇuṣva [k, g: tat-] mahāprājña yathāvat kālikākramam || 3 ||

The venerable Bhairava said:

Listen, I will tell (you) all that has come from (my) mouth and is in the

mouths (of initiates). The supreme essence, devoid of (anything that can be)
denoted (by words) and (any) denotator, cannot be told (to others).

Incomparable (to anything in any other) śāstra, it is hard to understand and hard

to acquire. Even today, it has not been known by Siddhas, (even though they)
possess an awakened consciousness. It has come down through the series (of
masters and disciples) and moves from mouth to mouth. O greatly wise one,

listen to that Kālikākrama, as is proper. (1-3)

g 45a) yat tad brahma paraṁ dhāma vyomātītaṁ nirāmayam |
niṣkalaṁ [k: nikūlaṁ; g: nikṛlaṁ] ca paraṁ śuddhaṁ [k: śuddhi; g: śūddhi]
nirvikāraṁ nirāśrayam || 4 ||
kaivalyaṁ ca nirādhāraṁ sarvavāgjālavarjitam |
niṣṭattvaṁ paramātmākhyaṁ ajaṁ śāntaṁ dhruvaṁ [g: dhruva] śivam [k, g: śi

J II5 I

bhāvābhāvapadairhīnaṁ [k: -padaihīnaṁ] bhāvanāparivarjitam |

That Brahman that is the supreme abode beyond the Void, free of

disease, formless, supremely pure, unchanging, without support, liberation

(kaivalya) (itself), without foundation, free of all the net of speech, free of the

metaphysical principles, called the Supreme Self, unborn, tranquil, peaceful,
stable, auspicious (siva), devoid of the planes of Being and Nonbeing, and
devoid of meditation. (4-6ab)

hānādānapadair muktaṁ [k: dānādānapadairyuktaṁ] sarvagaṁ parameśvaram

l

śaktyātītaṁ guṇātītaṁ sarvadvandvavivarjitam |
akṣarākṣarabhāvena bhāvyaṁ tanna kadācana || 7 I|
na dvaitaṁ na ca vãdvaitaṁ [k: nãdvaitaṁ] dvaitãdvaitobhayojjhitam |
kintu sarvopamāhīnaṁ yasya saṁvittilakṣaṇam || 8 I|
cittāt parataraṁ vāpi śabdāt [k: śraddhāt] parataraṁ sadā |
tasyāvabodhāt paramā śaktiḥ śaktimataḥ parā |I 9 |I

g 45b) akalā ca [g: va] kalārūpā maholkaiva [k: maholkeva; g: mahotkeva]

sutejasā [g: -sī] |

Free of the planeṣs of abandonment and assumption, omnipresent, the

Supreme Lord, beyond Śakti, beyond the qualities (of Nature), free of all

duality, that is never contemplated by any (word) made of letters, neither dual

nor nondual, free of both duality and nonduality, but (also) free of all metaphors.
(Its one) characteristic is consciousness (sarīvitti), and that is also beyond mind,

and always much great than speech (śabda). The Supreme Power, which is
greater than the possessor of power, (emerges) from its consciousness

(avabodha). Free of differentiated energy (akalā), Her nature is differentiated

APPENDIX C CHAPTER FOUR

energy (kalārūpā), like a great burning coal, She is (full of great and) beautifully

radiant energy (sutejasī) (6cd-10ab)

upamānasvarūpeṇa [k: -ne; g: -rūpena] bhūribhānurivoditā || 10 ||
khakalā khamayī [k, g: khabhayī] khasthā khecarīṣv api durgamā [k: durbhagā]

mahākālīkalākhyātā [k, g: -lāyātā] kalāmrtamayī śubhā lI I 1 II

In a metaphorical form, She arises like a great (radiant) Sun. The energy
(kalā) of the Void, She is the Void, residing in the Void. Even amongst the
Skyfarers She is hard to attain. She is called the energy of the Great Kālī. Made
of the nectar of energy (kalā), She is auspicious. (10cd-11)
tasyāḥ kavalanodyatāḥ (?) [k: -tā] kālyaṁśāntapadānugāḥ [k: kālpa - -gā; g:
kālpa -] |
saṁhārakāraṇe [k: -kālane; g: -kālaṇe] yās tu saṅṁsthitā [g: sa-] nāyikā hara ||

12Il

Born from Her (act of) swallowing (all things), they are consonant with

the plane within Kālī’s body; O Hara, the leaders (of the hosts of energies), they
abide in the cause of the destruction (of all things).

tāsāṁ saṁharaṇārthārtham ekaikā [k kh g: ekeyaṁ] bahudhā gatā |
kālarūpāntakāriṇī [k, g: -karaṇī] yatra sā [g: so] śāntimṛcchati [g: -marcchati]

||13 I|

ekaikā sā svasāmarthyāt saṁhārakaraṇodyatā [all: saṁhāraharaṇo-] |
ekaikā ca parā devī jñeyā brahmasvarūpiṇī |l 14 |I
In order for them to accomplish their task of (universal) withdrawal,

each one (of those Kālīs) has become many. (Her essential) nature time, She

brings (all things) to an end. Wherever she is, she bestows peace. By virtue of
her own power, each one is engaged in bringing about withdrawal. One should
know that each one is the Absolute (brahmasvarūpiṇī), (each one) the supreme

(parā) goddess. (13-14)
evaṁ sā [k: syā

śā] dvādaśair bhedaiḥ [k:

-dair; g: dvādaśai-]

paramārkaṣvarāpi nī |i. -paramākta(rtha)-; g: paramākka-] |

dvādaśāpi tadutpannāḥ śuddhāḥ [g: śraddhāḥ] prakāśyanirmalāḥ [kh: prakāśa-

J|115 l

g 46a) sūryakotisahasrābhāś candrāyutanibhopamāḥ [k: -sahastrā- -pamā; g: sahastrā-] |
vigrahānte sarvadikkāḥ [k: savadikkā; g: -dikkā] śāntās taddharmam āgatāḥ [k:

-gatā] | 1 6 ||

In this way, she is the Supreme Sun with twelve divisions. And twelve

have arisen from that, which is pure and free of the stain of the object of
manifestation. Their light is like that of thousands of billions of suns and they
are like billions of moons. Present in all the directions within (phenomenal)
form, tranquil, they have attained that nature (dharma). (15-16)

TANTRĀLOKA

sarvāstamitabhāvā sā kālī kālāntakāriṇī |

svabhāvapadasaṁrūḍhā [k: -saṁrūḍhāṁ] svaprabhā sā [all: vā] kuleśvarī || 17

I

mahākālīti saṁjñā sā pāramparyakramoditā [k: -kramoṁḍitā] |
sadasadtyaktasadbhāvā [k, g: sadasadvyakta-] paramānandanandinī|| 18 II
Her condition is that of all things that have set (and come to an end).

She is Kālī, who brings about the end of time (and death). Eṣtablished on the
plane of the essential nature (svabhāva) (of all things), a light unto herself, She

is Kuleśvaṁī, and Her name is Mahākālī, who has arisen within the sequence of
the transmission (pāramparyakrama). She is true Being that has abandoned
(phenomenal) being and nonbeing, delighted by supreme bliss. (17-18)
bindusthānācalā [g:

-vācalā] nityā svecchārūpā tu saṁsthitā [g: sa-] |

ekākinī caikavīrā ṣuṣūkṣmā [g: ṣuśūkṣmā] cāvyayā parā ll 19 ||

Immobile in the location of the (dimensionless) Point (bindu) (of the

light of consciousness), she is eternal and abides in the form of Her own
(inherent free)

will.

Solitary

imperishable and supreme.

and

without companion

(ekavīrā),

She is

tāsāṁ nāmāni ye deva dvādaśa [k, g: -śaḥ] śṛṇu bhairava |

sarvakāraṇanirmuktā icchā tu yā [g: pā] tu [g: tī] saṁsthitā || 20 ||

khasvarūpā [k kh: ṣvasvarūpā] khamadhyasthā khacakre ca vyavasthitā [g:
pyapasthitā] |
nirāmayā cāprameyā anuccāryā guṇojjhitā [g: guṇojjhatā] |I 21 I|
O god, Bhairava, listen to their twelve names. She who is free of all
causes, who abides as (the free, omnipotent) will (icchā), Her nature the Void
(kha), located in the Wheel of the Void (khacakra), she abides within the centre
of the Void. Free of imperfection, immeasurable, unutterable, she is free of (all
phenomenal) qualities. (20-21)

phaṭkārāntā mahāghorā grasantī bhairaveśvarān |
ravimadhye nirānandā cinmarīcyantabhāsikā || 22. |
tasyā [k, g: tasya] dvādaśadhāmnāyaṁ [k, g: -dvādaśanā] nāmābhiḥ saha [k, g:

namadena] tac chṛṇu |

(As the Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī Vidyā,) She ends with the syllable PHAT. Very

fierce, she devours lord Bhairava. She is the Bliss of Śtillness (nirānandā) who,

in the centre of the Sun (of consciousness) inwardly illumines the rays of
consciousness. Listen (now) to the teaching concerning her twelve-fold (form)
along with (their) names.” (22-23ab)

APPENDIX C CHAPTER FOUR

The Thirteen Kālīs of the Devīpañcaśatika
Withdrawal of Emanation
1) Sṛṣṭikālī (1) (withdrawal of the emanation of emanation)

mattodayā vyomarūpā vyomasthā vyomavarjitā || 23 ||
sarvā sarvavinirmuktā viśvasmin

yā kalā viśvavibhavā sṛṣṭyarthakaraṇakṣamā || 24 ||

Arising from me, Her form Emptiness (vyoman) and, located in
Emptiness, She is devoid of Emptiness. She is everything and, free of all things,
She destroys emanation in all this universe. That energy (kalā) whose glorious
power (vibhava) is all things and, capable of serving as the instrument of
emanation, inwardly attains tranquillity, is known as Sṛṣṭikālī. (23cd-25ab)
2) Sthitikāḹī (withdrawal of the emanation of persistence)

haṁ ṣinī paudgalī yeyaṁ bālāgraśatakalpanā || 25 ||
kalpate sarvadehasthā sthitiḥ sargasya kāriṇī|
yad utpannā tu [ṭ: nta] sā devī puṇas tatraiva līyate || 26 ||

tāṁ viddhi [kh: ciddhi] devadeveśa sthitikālīṁ maheśvara |
‘She is Haṁsinī (the Gander of the Unstruck Sound of the vital breath)
and Paudgalī (the Goddess of the Embodied Soul), Who is (subtle) like the

hundredth part of the tip ofa hair. (She) is conceived (kalpate) to be in the body

of all (living beings, where She) brings about the persistence (sthiti) of creation.

The Goddess Who has arisen (thus), again merges just there (where She arises).
O Maheśvara, God of the gods, know Her to be Sthitikālī. (25cd-27ab)
3) Saṁhārakālī (5) (withdrawal of the emanation of withdrawal)

caṇḍakālī śuddhavarṇā yāmṛtagrasanodyatā || 27 ||
bhāvābhāvavinirmuktā viśvasaṁhārarūpiṇī |
yatra ṣā yāti vilayaṁ sā ca saṁhārakālikā || 28 I|
‘The fierce (caṇḍa) Kālī, Her colour pure (black), is intent on devouring
the nectar (of phenomena). (Called) Saṁhārakālikā, She is free of being and
nonbeing, Her nature is the withdrawal of all things and is where She dissolves

away. (27cd-28)

4) (2) Raktakālī (withdrawal of the emanation of the Inexplicable)

Quoted in TĀv ad 4/148.

” DP 5/27cd-27ab is quoted in the commentary on the description of Sthitināśakālī in

TĀv ad 4/150bcd.

Quoted in TĀv ad 4/152.

TANTRĀLOKA

na caiṣā cakṣuṣā grāhyā na ca sarvendriyasthitā |
nirguṇā nirahaṅkārā rañjayed viśvamaṇḍalam || 29 ||
sā kalā tu yad utpannā sā jñeyā raktakālikā |
That energy (kalā) that has arisen inwardly, that cannot be grasped by
the eye, is not present in any of the senses, and devoid of (phenomenal)

qualities, is free of ego, colours (with attachment the entire) circle of the
universe, should be known to be Raktakālikā. (29-30ab)

Withdrawal of Persistence

mahācito [k, kh: mahāncito; g: mahāścito] yathā sadyo urmī [g: ūrmi] madhyāj
jalaukasām [g:jalakaṇāṁ] l| 30 ||
kṣayaṁ yāti tu tatrastho jagat sarvam idaṁ tathā |
yā sā pralayakāle tu akramā kramayogataḥ || 31 II
Like a wave (in which) much (water) is gathered from the middle of the
ocean, present there, is destroyed in a moment, (so too) in the same way all this
universe (arises out of consciousness and therein ceases) at the time of (cosmic)

destruction. (That power which is) devoid of succession (operates in that way)
by (its) association with succession (krama). (30-31)

ahalā [k: aṭṭalā (?)] bhīṣaṇā [k: bheṣaṇā] raudrā kulakaulanirākulā |
alākṣyalakṣā [k: alakṣālakṣa; g: alakṣyālakṣa] nirlakṣā [g: nillakṣā] sukālī

nāma siddhidā || 32 |

‘She is Unstruck Sound (ahalā), t0 frightening, fierce, (both) Kula
(Śakti) and Kaula (the union of Śiva and Śakti), '' She is undisturbed.

Undefinable, She cannot be (perceived or) defined by (any) defining (feature)'

— She is Sukālī, Who bestows success (siddhi)."

6) Yamakālī (4) (withdrawal of the persistence of emanation)

yamarūpasvarūpaṣthā rūpātītasvarūpagā |
sā kalā līyate yasyāṁ yamakālī tu sā smṛtā || 33 |
Yamakālī is said to be (the Kālī) within which the energy (kalā) that is

present in the essential nature of the restraint (of injunctions and prohibitions)

Quoted in TĀv 4/149-150a
Read ahalā in the place of ḍakalā.

' Read kulakaula- for kulakāli-.
' Read lakṣanirlakṣā for lakṣyanirlakṣyā. The edited text of the DP reads:
ahalā [k, kh: aṭṭalā (?)] bhīṣaṇā [k, kh: bheṣaṇā] raudrā kulakaulanirākulā |
alakṣyā [k, kh: alakṣā] lakṣanirlakṣā [g: nillakṣā]
sukālī nāma siddhidā || DP 5/32.
' DP 5/32 is quoted in TĀv ad 4/173ab.

APPENDIX C CHAPTER FOUR

and in the essential nature (of reality which is) beyond form, dissolves away."


7) Mṛtyukālī (6) (withdrawal of the persistence of persistence)
paśurūpā [g: pāśū-] svarūpasthā rūpātītādyatītagā |
kharakṣiṇī [k: kara-; g: karajviṇī] kaleśānī [k kh: -ni] mṛtyukālāntapātinī || 34 ||
mṛtyvantakā [k: mṛtyuntakā; g: mṛtyantakā] kalā yasya praviśed dehamaṇḍale |
Established in her own nature, her form is the fettered soul, present in
(the reality that is) beyond, beyond form and the rest, she protects the Sky, she
governs the energies, and falls at the extreme end of the time of death, the
destroyer of death, (this) energy (kalā) enters the maṇḍala of the body. (34-

35ab)

tena hy eṣā kuleśānī mṛtyukālāntapātinī || 35 ||
mrṛtyukālakalā yasyāḥ praviśed vigrahaṁ śiva |
tadā sā mṛtyukālīti jñeyā giriṣutādhava || 36 ||

Thus, She is' the Mistress of Kula, Who descends (pātinī) at the end of

the time of death. O Śiva, Arouser of the Daughter of the Mountains, (when)
Her energy, which is that of the Time of Death, penetrates the form (vigraha)

(of someone’s body),' she should then be known to be Mṛtyukālī (the Kālī of
Death). (35cd-36)

8) Bhadrakālī ((7) Rudrakālī) (withdrawal of the persistence of withdrawal)
gamāgamasugamyasthā mahābodhāvalokinī |
sarvalokasya kalyāṇī bhadrā bhadrasukhapradā |
yatraiva śāmyati kalā bhadrakālīti sā smṛtā || 38 |I
(bhedasya drāvaṇād bhadrā bhadrasiddhikarīti yā 1)
Present in (the reality) easily attained between the coming and going (of

the breath), She observes the Great Awakened Consciousness (mahābodha) and,

free of the impurity of Māyā, She delights in the nectar of knowledge. She is

auspicious (bhadrā), and benefiting all the world, She bestows auspicious
(bhadra) bliss.' The energy that comes to rest there is known as Bhadrakālī.
' DP 5/33 is quoted in TĀv ad 4/151. Read with the MSs rāpātītā for rāpātīta
' Read, with the MSs of the DP, tena hy eṣā for om ity eṣā.
' Read with the MSs of the DP yasya for yasyāḥ. Two lines prior to this one in the MSs

this line is repeated. The second half reads praviśed dehamaṇḍale — ‘penetrates the
sphere of the bodyʼ.

' DP 5/35cd-36.

' Read with the manuscripts of the DP, bhadrā bhadrasukhapradā for rudrā

rudrasukhapradā.

Read with the manuscripts of the DP, ‘bhadrakālī tú’ for ‘rudrakālītī Notice that

bhadrā or bhadra replaces rudrā or rudra everywhere in these lines. As Jayaratha has

TANTRĀLOKA

As She dissolves away (dravaṇāt) duality (bheda), (She is the auspicious one
(bhadrā) Who bestows the (most) auspicious (bhadra) accomplishment.) (37-

38)

9) (9) Paramārkakālī (withdrawal of the persistence of the Inexplicable)
ekākinī caikavīrā ṣusūkṣmā sūkṣmavarjitā |

paramātmaparāvasthā parāparasvarūpiṇī || 39 ||
sā kalā pararūpeṇa yatra saṁlīyate śiva |
sā kalā paramārkeṭi jñeyā bhasmāṅgabhūṣaṇa || 40 ||
O Śiva, You Whose body is adorned with ashes, the single solitary

energy (without a partner) (ekavīrā), Who is extremely subtle and (beyond it,) is

devoid of the subtle, She Who is the supreme state of the Supreme Self. Her

nature both supreme (transcendence) and lower (immanence), She Who is the

energy that merges there with the supreme nature should be known to be the

Kālī (called) Paramārkā. (39-40)
Withdrawal of Withdrawal

10) Mārtaṇḍakaālī (8) (withdrawal of the withdrawal of emanation)

Śabdabrahmapadātītā ṣaṭtriṁśāntanavāntagā |
brahmāṇḍakhaṇḍād uttīrṇā mārtaṇḍī mūrtir avyayā || 41 I|
sā kalā līyate yasyāṁ mārtaṇḍī kālikocyate |
Beyond the plane of the Sound Absolute (Śahdabrahman), present at

the end of the nine (syllables of Kāli’s Vidyā) at the summit of the thirty-six

(principles), beyond (Māyā, which is) the part that is the Egg of Brahmā

(brahmāṇḍa), She is Mārtaṇḍī, Whose form is imperishable. The energy that

merges within Her is called Mārtaṇḍī Kālikā. (40-41ab)

11) Kālāgnirudrakālī (10) (withdrawal of the withdrawal of persistence)

varadā viśvarūpā ca guṇātītā parā kalā l| 42 ||
aghoṣā sāsvarārāvā kālāgnigrasanodyatā |
nirāmayā nirākārā yasyāṁ sā śāmyati sphuṭam || 43 II
just noted that the name for this Kālī is also Bhadrā, it seems unlikely that Jayaratha
himself made these changes. One wonders whether this clearly intentional alteration is
the work of the editors or scribes of the manuscripts of the Tantrāloka and commentary.

DP 5/37-38 quoted in TĀv ad 4/158ab. The last line of the text is missing in the
manuscripts that have been recovered of the DP.

Read with the
paramātmapadãvasthã.

manuscripts

of

Read tatra for yatra.

the

DP

paramātmāparāvasthā

for

DP 5/39-40 is quoted in TĀv ad 4/166cd-167. Read with the manuscripts of the DP sā
kāī for sā kalā.
DP 5/41-42ab. Quoted in TĀv ad 4/163.

APPENDIX C CHAPTER FOUR

kālāgniruḍrakālīti sā jñeyāmaravandita |
The bestower of boons, its form all things, transcending the qualities (of

Nature), it is the supreme energy (kalā). Soundless, it is Unstruck Sound

(asvarārāvā), engaged in consuming the Fire of Time. Free of disease and
formless, O (Lord) praised by the gods, She Who clearly comes to rest within

that should be known to be Kālāgnirudrakālī. (42cd-44ab)

12) Mahākālakālī (11) (withdrawal of the withdrawal of withdrawal)

rtojjvalā mahādīptā sūryakoṭiṣamaprabhā || 44 I

kalākalaṅkarahitā kālasya kalanodyatā |
yatra sā layam āpnoti kālakālīti sā smṛtā || 45 ||

Burning with (the energy of) menses, blazing greatly, Her light is like
millions of suns, free of the stain of the powers (of limitation) (kalā), She is
intent on operating (kalanā) Time. There, where She dissolves away, she is

called Kālakālī. (44cd-45)

13) Mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakālī (12) (withdrawal of the withdrawal of
the Inexplicable)

tejojjvalā [k kh: tejījvalā, g: tejojvalā] mahādīptā sūryakoṭisamaprabhā |

daśasaptaviṣargasthā mahābhairavabhīṣaṇā || 46 ||
saṅhared bhairavān sarvān viśvaṁ ca surapūjita |
sāntaḥ śāmyati yasyāṁ ca sā syād bharitabhairavī || 47 |I
mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakālī parā ca sā |

Burning with radiant energy, greatly energized, her light like that of a
billion suns, ‘O (Śiva) worshipped by (all) the gods, She Who resides in the

emission of the seventeen (energies), fierce like the Great Bhairava, withdraws

all the Bhairavas and the universe. She within Whom She inwardly comes to
rest is Bhairavī, full (of all things). She is Parā (the Supreme Goddess) who is

DP 5/42cd-44ab is quoted in TĀv ad 4/168.

Read with the MSs of the DP, rtujvalā for ṛtojjvalā.
DP 5/44cd-45 is quoted in TĀv 4/169-170.

The Vidyā of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, who is the supreme form of Kālī of the Kashmiri Kālī
Krama, consists of seventeen syllables. She is accordingly depicted as being in the
centre, as the seventeenth and highest Goddess, surrounded by Her sixteen aspects,
represented by Kālīs, each of which embodies one of the syllables of the Vidyā. Theṣe
kind of configurations (cakra, maṇḍala) of purely female forms, is an interesting feature

of the Kālī Krama and its predecessor, the Mata, which is expounded in the

Jayadrathayāmala. A striking, well-known example of the same is Śrīcakra of the

Śrīvidyā school, which also consists entirely of female forms. In both these cases, the

Goddess in the centre contains within Herself the male polarity which must, of course,
be present in some form. The Wheel of Sixteen energies, in this case Kālīs, symbolizes

the moon with its sixteen digits. The seventeenth in the centre is understood to be the

emissive energy (visarga) that generates and withdraws the others. This matter is

discussed at length in Dyczkowski 2009: vol. 1, 421 ff and vol. 2, 346 ff.

TANTRĀLOKA

Mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakālī (the Fierce, Terrific and Ferocious Kālī of the

Great Bhairava). (46-48ab)

pūjyam etad brahmapadme [all: -padme] nirākhye ca nirāmaye || 48 II
soḍaśānte navānte vā cidante [k, g: cidantaḥ] parameśvara |
svasaṁvittikrameṇaiva bāhye [k: vākye; g: vāhya] vātha [k: nātha] trilocana ||

1|

[MS Kh resumes from here] rājavartena [k, g: rājavattena; kh: rāvattena]
rajasā vyomabimbaṁ tu [k: -vidhantu] kārayet |
bimbadvādaśakaṁ bāhye tad rūpam avatārayet || 5O II
kh 57b, g 49a) lohitaṁ vyomarekhāntaṁ [kh: -rekhānta; g: -reṣāntu] dadyāt
sindurakena ca [g: sidūrakena ca] |

viparyayeṇa vā kāryā śuklā [k: śuktā] vā vyomarekhikā || 51 II

niśite śūlacakre vā pūjayet tat svadehaje |

O Supreme Lord, that (group of Kālīs) should be worshipped on the

plane of the Brahman, which is unutterable and free of imperfection, at the End
of the Sixteen or at the End of the Nine within consciousness, or else, O Lord,
Three-eyed One! Externally in accord with the dynamism of one’s own
cognitive consciousness (svasaṁvittikrama). (48cd-49)

Cause a circle (vyomabimba) to be drawn with red lac (rājavarta) and

place twelve dots outside (around it).N (Then) at the end of a line place a red

(dot made) with vermillion. Or else in the opposite way make a white line; or

else worship that within a sharp circle of spears born from their own body. 5052ab
pañcāśītis tu devīnāṁ koṭayas tatra nityaśaḥ || 52 ||
vyomarūpāś ca tiṣṭhanti mahāsiddhipradā yataḥ |
madhye pūjyā mahākālī bāhye ‘nyā dvādaśa kramāt || 53 ||
pūrvād ārabhya sarvās tāḥ pūjayed yoginandana |
strīveśadhārī bhūtvāsau nagnavāso [k, kh, g: -vāsā] mahāmatiḥ || 54 1|
nirvikalpaḥ [g: -lpa] prasannātmā pūjākarmaviśāradaḥ |
yathā tathā yatra tatra sarvatra vimalāśayaḥ [g: -śaya] || 55 |I

Eighty-five billion goddesses are constantly present there, their form the
Void (vyoman), they bestow great accomplishments. For one should worship
Mahākālī in the centre and another twelve (Kālīs) outside (around her) in due

order. Ó you who delight yogis, they should all be worshipped, beginning from

the east. The man of great intellect (mati) (should do so) wearing women’s

clothes (or) naked, free of thought, content and skilled in the rite of worship. His

DP 5/46cd-48ab is quoted in TĀv ad 4/171-172. The last half of the last line reads in

the MSs of the DP -ghorā kālī parāparā. ʻ(She is) Mahābhairavāṇḍograghorā Kālī,
Who is (both) supreme (transcendent) and inferior (immanent).”

See TĀ 31/26-29ab, where a form of the Trika Trident maṇḍala is described in the

Trikādbhāva that incorporates twelve ‘voidsʼ, i.e., circles, on the central lotus. See note

there.

APPENDIX C CHAPTER FOUR

intention pure, (he may do so in any way) it may be, wherever and everywhere.

(52cd-55)

k- k.

k. sk. + 5k ?

asyāḥ [k, kh, g: asyāṁ] nāma [k, g: tama; kh: nama] na gṛhṇīyād avācyā [k, kh:

: vācyāvā] ṣoḍaśādhikā || 63 I|
prayatnena vidyā vidyeśvareśvarī |
sakr̥duccāraṇād [g: urvvāraṇād] devyās tiṣṭhati kṣaṇamadhyataḥ [g: kṣa -] ||

64 I|

ītis tu devīnāṁ kotayo vyomabhāsikāḥ [k, kh: -bhāṣikāḥ] |
tasmān noccārayed devīṁ khecaratvapradāyikām [k, kh: khecaraśca-; g:
khecaranva-] || 65 |I
One should not take her name, she who is (one) more than sixteen

cannot be uttered (avācyā). The Vidyā, who is the goddess of the Lord of
Vidyās, should be kept hidden with effort. By just uttering it once, the goddess

is present in a moment in the midst of 850 million goddesses who illumine the
Void. Thus, the Goddess, who bestows the state of flight, should not be uttered.

(63cd-65)

k- k. s sk. . + 5k Ī

mantro ‘yaṁ kila kālīnāṁ śrṇuṣv anyad [g: -nyat] vadāmi te || 68 1|
32g-b)

[k.,
kh,
g:

pañcaphaṭkāravarjitām [k, kh, g: -varjitam] |
dvādaśābhyaś [k, g: dvādaśabhya-] caikam ekam ekaikasyā maheśvara || 69 ||
yojyaṁ [g: yojyāṁ] tadādimasyānte paścāt saṁjñāṁ prakalpayet |
phaṭkāraṁ ca tataḥ paścāt tamaḥpādāntavarjitā l| 70 ||
bījarājena [k, kh: bījena] vā pūjyā [kh: pūjya] nāmnā [kh: nāmnā]
cāmaṁtritena [k: -citena; kh: cāsaṁcitena] tu |

sṛṣṭisaṁṅhḥr̥danāmākhyās triyo [Missing 34b to 35a upto here] vividhayo matāḥ

l| 71 I

35kh-b) navākṣarā tu yā devī tasyā etad [k, kh, g: etād] vijrṁúbhitam [k:
vijrmmitam] |

! The DP goes on to extract the mantras required for the rite in code. First, the bījarāja
(56-57) (KHPHREṀ), then the Seventeen Syllable Vidyā (5/58-61) and navākṣarā (in

5/!65cd-70). After extracting the seventeen syllable Vidyā, the text continues:

The Extraction of the seventeen syllable Vidyā follows from 56cd to 63ab, which here
is:
ÃĀṀ KHPHREṀ PHĀṀ PHĪṀ MAHĀCAṆḌAYOGEŚVARĪI PHAṬ PHAṬ PHAṬ

PHATṬ PHAṬ

For the Vidyās of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī and the Kālīs, see Appendix to Chapter Thirty.

Bhairava goes on in 5/66-68ab to extract Navāksarā -- the Nine syllable Vidyā, saying

that it is the Vidyā of the 850 million goddesses that fly in the Void of consciousness. It
is KHPHREṀ MAHĀCAṈḌAYOGEŚVARI.

TANTRĀLOKA

This is indeed the Mantra of the Kaālīs, listen as I tell you something

else. Removing the five PHATs from the seventeen syllable Vidyā, each of the
remaining twelve (syllables corresponds to one (of the twelve surrounding
Kālīs). After that comes the name of the Kālī followed by PHAT. Or else they

can be worshipped with the bījarāja (KHPHREṀ), addressing each one at a
time by name. They are said to be of three kinds, emanation, withdrawal and the
inexplicable. This is the unfolding of the goddess Navākṣarā (Nine Sylables).

(68cd-72ab)

The Worship of Śakti with Kula substances
sāpi [kh: sṣopi] pūrvoktabījasya [g: pūrvākta-] prapañcatve vyavasthitā || 72 ||
tat ṣvayaṁ pūjitaṁ yena viśvaṁ tena prapūjitam |
pūjanīyā mahādeva saṁhārāntakarī parā || 73 ||
na jñãtā triṣu lokeṣu tvadṛte bhaktivatsala |
33g-a) cakraṁ [g: cakra] samastapūrvoktaṁ [g: -pūrvokta] saha cakratrayeṇa

vā || 74 I|

pūjyā [k, kh, g: pūjyāṁ] samayavidyā [k, kh, g: -vidyāṁ] ca dikṣu [k, kh:
dikṣuṁ ] caiva vidikṣu ca |

vyomacakraṁ [k, kh, g: cakra] triśūlaṁ [k: triśālāṁ; kh, g: triśūlā] ca krameṇa

paripūjayet |I 75 II

ekadvitricaturbhedaiḥ [g: -ticaturbhedaiḥ] samādiṣṭaṁ [k, kh, g: samadikka]

yathā param |
She

too,

(the

goddess)

of

the

aforementioned

seed

syllable

(KHPHREṀ), is present in (all) the universe. He who has himself worshipped
(the Wheel) has worshipped the universe. O Mahādeva, (Kālī,) the supreme
(goddess) who brings about the end of destruction, and should be worshipped, is
not known, O dear one of devotion, to be without you in the three worlds. The
entire assembly (cakra) mentioned before (should be worshipped,) or with three

wheels. The basic (samaya) Vidyā should be worshipped in the (cardinal)
directions and in the secondary ones. The Wheel of the Void and the Trident
should then be worshipped in due order in one, two, three and four divisions as
taught. (72cd-76ab)
śaktyā saha paraṁ kṣobhaṁ mantradhyānaikatatparam || 76 ||
kr̥tvā śaktyutthitair [g: śaktyatthitair] dravyaiḥ] pūjayec cakramadhyagaḥ [g: ccakra ] ]

samastacakramadhyād vā [g: madhyād vā] kāñcid ekāṁ prapūjayet ||

77 1

pūjayed raktavastre [g: -vakte] vā dīpe [k: dīpa] khaḍgeśamūrddhani |
madhye pūjyā punar devī vidyeśānī navākṣarā || 78 ||

The

seventeen

syllable

Vidyā

is

HRĪM

(or

KHPHREṀ)

MAHĀCAṆḌAYOGEŚVARĪ THṛ ḌHr THr PHAṬ PHAṬ PHAṬ PHAṬ PHAT. See
TĀv ad 29/ 69-70ab and note there.
The nine-syllable form of
MAHĀCAṈḌAYOGEŚVARI.

Vidyā

is:

KHPHREṀ

APPENDIX C CHAPTER FOUR

Having brought about the supreme arousal along with Śakti (the Kaula
partner), the one who is solely dedicated to mantra and meditation and is in the
middle of the Wheel, should worship with substances born from Śakti. Or else
one should worship any one (of the Kālīs) from the midst of the Wheel. She
should be worshipped on a red cloth or on a lamp (i.e. on a piece of meat) or on
the top of a sword. The goddess who is the goddess of the Vidyā, Navākṣarā,
should be worshipped again in the centre. (76cd-78)

bahiścakroditāḥ pūjyāḥ pūrvoktā bhaktivatsala |

sr̥ṣṭyãdyā bāhyataḥ pūjyā madhye saptadaśākṣarā I| 79 ||

nānāvidhāni puṣpāṇi [g: puṣyāni] nānādravyāṇi dāpayet |
33g-b) nānāvidhān paśūn deva dātavyān aviśaṁkitam [k, kh: yaviśaṁkitam] ||

O beloved of devotion, the (goddesses) mentioned before that arise from

the outer Wheels should be worshipped. She who begins with emanation should
be worshipped outside and the Seventeen-syllabled (Vidyā) in the centre. One
should offer many kinds of flowers and (edible) substances, O god, one should
offer many kinds of sacrificial animals, without hesitation. (79-80)

reto harāmbu puṣpaṅṁ ca kṣāraṁ nālājyakaṁ [k, kh, g: -hyakaṁ ] tathā |
pauruṣaṁ |[k: pauruṣa] kṣmābhavaṁ cchāgaṁ |[k: chāgaṁ] mīnajaṁ

śākunīyakam [g: śākulīyakaṁ] || 81 II

36kh-b) palāṇḍu |[k, kh:
dravyadvādaśakaṁ śubham |

g:

laśunaṁ

caiva

The auspicious group of twelve substances (consists of) semen, urine
(harāmbu), menstrual blood (puṣpa), faeces (kṣāra) and phlegm (nālājyaka),
human flesh (pauruṣa), beef (kṣmābhava), goat’s flesh (chāga), fish, fowl,

onion and garlic. (81-82ab)

ebhir dvādaśabhir deva [k, kh, g: devyo] naivedyais toṣayec chiva [g: -

yaicchiva] || 82 ||

āni yāni dravyāṇi rasarūpāṇi dāpayet |
pūjanīy
āyā] yathānyāyaṁ vittaśāṭhyaṁ na kārayet || 83 ||
paṣścād guruṁ dakṣayet [k, g: -yeta] sarvasvena sureśvara |
ājñābhaṅgo na kartavyaḥ prāṇān [g: prāṇā] tasmai pradāpayet || 84 ||
etat [g: etan] te sarvam ākhyātaṁ kramaṁ kālisamudbhavam |

gopayet prāṇavad yatnād anyathā maraṇaṁ bhavet |l 85 |I
mukhāmnāyagatā vidyā vaktuṁ [k, kh: vaktraṁ] no yujyate hara |
34g-a) yasmāc chrīnāthabhāṇḍāre cintāmaṇir iva [g: vintā-] sthitā || 86 ||
37kh-a) mayā tathaiva hr̥daye vidyeśī gopitā hara |
iti śrīmaduttarapīṭthodbhūte [k: -pīthoddhṛte] śrīśrṛīnāthāvatārite [g: -nāthāva
rite] śrīkālikākulapañcaśate [k, kh, g: -kule pañca-] pañcamaḥ paṭalaḥ || 5 |1
° Quoted in TĀv ad 29/17. Note that in TĀ 29/17 the offering and consumption these
substances is said to be taught by Sambhu. Is this Abhinava’s Trika teacher,
Sambhunātha?

TANTRĀLOKA

‘0 god, O Śiva, satisfy (the Kālīs) with these twelve (kinds of)

sacrificial food substances, and offer (them) other delicious substances. They

should be worshipped as is proper. One should not be stingy (vittaśāthya,

literally ‘deceitful about one’s meansʼ). O lord of the gods, after that the teacher

should be offered all that one possesses as dakṣiṇa. One should not transgress
(the teacher’s) command. One should offer him (one’s) vital breaths. (82cd-84)
I have told you all the liturgy (krama) that has come from Kālī. (Every)
effort should be made (to keep it secret and) protect it like (one’s) life, otherwise
(if one does not,) death will ensue. O Hara! It is not right to tell (others) the

Vidyā that has come through the oral tradition, for it is like a wish granting gem

in Śrīnātha’s storehouse. In the same way, O Hara, I have hidden the queen of

Vidyās in (my) heart. (82cd-87ab)

This is the fifth chapter of the venerable Kālikākulapañcaśata, that has
come from the venerable Northern Seat (uttarapīṭha) and been brought down to
earth by the venerable Srīnātha.

Appendix D
to Chapter Four

The Kālikāstotram

by

Śivānandanātha
The Early Post-scriptural Development of the Krama system — the works of
Śivānanda (Jñānanetra) and his successors up to Abhinavagupta
The final phase of the development of the Kālīkrama was initiated by
Jñānanetra in the middle of the ninth century. Scholars commonly refer to the
teachings of the school he founded, the Krama system. He is said to have
received it as a revelation from the Goddess Maṅgalā, who is identified with

Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī in Odḍiyānapītha. Thus, his teachings mark the beginning of
post-scriptural Krama. The names of the system, for example, Kramanaya,
Devīnaya and Mahārtha, are known to the earlier scriptural traditions of the
Kālīkula, also called Kālīkrama. However, with Śivānanda it emerges out of the
anonymity of scripture. Thus, he founded the school that we nowadays call the
Krama system and that bears these same names, especially Mahārtha. He also
‘brought down to earth’ at least one Tantra — the Yonigahvara. Significantly,
this too is said to have been revealed in Uḍḍiyāna — the uttarapīṭha. Thiīs is
unusual. We are only rarely told who does this. The precedent in this case is
Matsyendranātha. He was the first to bring Kula Tantras down to earth. Kaulism
existed before, but its teachings lay embedded in the Mata and Yāmala,
specifically, the Jayadrathayāmala and the earlier Picumata, the
Brahmayāmala, where it was even less defined. There are indeed several
Tantras that consider themselves to have been brought down to earth by
Matsyendranātha. These are of two kinds: sectarian and non-sectarian. Well
known examples of non-sectarian ones are the Kaulajñānanirṇaya and related
Tantras. Amongst sectarian ones, the earliest that has survived is a Krama
Tantra, namely, the Ūrmikaularaṇava. Subsequently, the Kubjikā Tantras
appeared, attributed to him.
A passage found in the Yonigahvara is also found at the beginning of
chapter three of the Devīpañcaśatika, the same apart from the usual minor
& ÃÁ gyoṭṟam (Jñānanetrapādakṛtam) Kī: NAK no. 5-5183 śaivatantra 157 =
NGMPP reel no. A 150/6; size: 32 1/2 x 12 1/2; folios: 35. remarks: Devanāg; page. 21
Page no. 21: itthaṁ svarūpastutirabhyadhāyi samyak samāveśadaśāvaśena | mayā

(sśivenāstu) śivāya samyag mamaiva viśvasya tu maṅgalākhye || ḷ

The colophon of the Yonigahvara reads: ity uttarāmnāye śrī uṁkārapīthavinirgate

śšrīcaṉṇḍabhairave ṣoḍaśasahasre udite [udvite] yonigahvaraṁ samāptaṃ || See
bibliography for the bibliographical details of the sole recovered manuscript of this
Tantra.

Yonigahvara Aṣiatic Society of Bengal catalogue serial number serial no. 5903 MS no
10000 (f1. 17-18a).

DP 3/1-18ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

variants. Listed there are the four Yuganāthas, who were founders of Kaulism in
the four cosmic ages (yuga), and their consorts. Matsyendranātha figures as the

founder of Kaulism in this Age. He had twelve disciples. A detailed account is

found in the Kulakrīdāvatāra, which Abhinava quotes in Chapter Twenty-nine.
In both the YG and the DP, the passage continues with a lineage of four teachers
beginning with Niṣkriyānanda, noted above. In this way the locus of an
independent Kaula tradition saw its roots in the Kaulism taught by
Matsyendranātha. In this way, Kaulism as a whole is channelled through the
teachings of the lineage of the Kālīkrama that thereby appropriates them. This

connection is strengthened and maintained down the line. The YG and DP texts

begin with the same auspicious verse of invocation, thus emphasizing the tie
between them. We also find it at the beginning of the Devīdvyardhaśatika,
which draws a great deal from the Yonigahvara or some common source. It
reads:
‘I bow to Kālī, the supreme bestower of Being, to my own nature. She is
the Light that has emerged from frying pan (heated by the) Fire at the end (of
Time) She is established in the middle within the three paths of the Moon, Sun
and Fiīre, her state the dissolving away of consciousness, the object of
consciousness, the mind, the senses and (their) objects. ’


The four Yuganāthas and their consorts:

Kṛtayuga:
Khagendranātha
and
Vijjā
avvã
Dvāyuga: Kūrmanātha and Maṁgalādūti (DP ambā)
Tretayuga: Meśanātha and Kāmamaṁgalā
Kaliyuga: Mīnanāthaṁ and Koṁkaṇāmbā (DP Kuṁkaṇādīti)

(DP

ambā)

TĀ 29/29 ff. See Dyczkowski 1988: 69-71, 79-81 for charts and detailed presentation.
yā sāntakāgnikuharotthitabhāsvarūpāṁ
somārkavahnitripathodaramadhyasaṁsthām [k, kh: somākka-] |

ciccetyacittaviṣayākṣavilīnabhāvāṁ [k: cicceta- -virīnabhāvāṁ; kh: cicceta-]

svabhāvabhāvakiparāṁ [k, kh: ṣvābhāva-] praṇamāmi kālīm l|

This is the edited verse at the beginning of the two recovered manuscripts of

the Devīdvyardhaśatika. The same verse that appears at the beginning of the
Yonigahavara and the Devīpañcaśatika is practically identical. Surprisingly, whilst the
version in the Devīdvyardhaśatika is practically correct, the corruptions in these two

texts are exactly the same. It reads in both cases without variants:
yā sāntakāgnikuharothitabhāsvarūpāṁ
somārkavahnitṛthodaramadhyasaṅṁṣthā |

ciccetaccintaviṁśabhāvāṁ

svābhāvabhasaki parāṁ praṇamāmi kālīm ||

Jayaratha knows the Devīdvyardhaśatika, which he calls Sārdhaśatika, quoting

from it the names of the thirteen Kālīs (see TĀv ad 4/149-150a and notes). The
colophon reads:
paramahaṁsaparivrājakauttarānvayācāryaśrīmadvimalaprabodhapādānām iyam iti [k:
-ti; kh: -parivrājaka-uttarāṉvayā- -miti] |
‘This (book) is that of the venerable renouncer and teacher Vimalaprabodha of
the Northern Lineage.”

APPENDIX D CHAPTER FOUR

The third phase emerges out of the anonymity of scripture. The oral
transmission along the lineage founded by Jñānanetra emerges in the works of
the teachers of his lineage. The identity of the Krama defines itself progressively
in this way. This process reaches its climax in the system presented by three
texts

recovered

to

date,

all

of

which,

we

have

seen,

are

called

Mahānayaprakāśa. There we find an exposition of basically the same system
with the usual variants. The Mahānayaprakāśa by Arṇasiṁha has been
translated in Appendix H. The core of this system is the Pañcavāhakrama, the
Sequence of the Five Currents. The Five Currents are essentially the procession
of energies in the five cycles of creation, persistence, withdrawal, the
inexplicable (anākhyā) and illumination (bhāsā).

We find it in both texts in a seed state. Thus, after presenting the

Yuganāthas, the YG goes on to declare that:

‘In the cremation ground (called) Karavīra in the venerable Uttarapītha,

once the venerable Jṅñānanetranātha had extracted the Yonigahvara, which is
most excellent essence of Mantra, he revealed it on the surface of the earth.

The YG is indeed concerned with the ‘essence of Mantra’, as most of it
is taken up with the extraction in code of the forms of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī’s Vidyā,
that is used for the worship of the cycles (cakra) of emanation (sṛṣti),
persistence (sthiti), withdrawal (sarṁīhāra), the Inexplicable (Anāmā) and
illumination (bhāsā).

Thus, here we find a precursor in this form of the

Pañcacakrakrama, the Sequence of the Five Wheels. The DP also goes on to

describe the same cremation ground. The wording is practically the same, but
there all is that is said is that it is worshipped by the Deity, and other details are
given, but there is no mention of Jñānanetra’s presence there.” Nonetheless,

Śivānanda (i.e., Jīñānanetra) appears as the fourth in line in the lineage founded
by Niṣkriyānanda, according to verses in the common passage mentioned above.
This absence suggests that the DP preceded the YG. If so, the passage in
common we are examining was carried over from there into the YG.

One wonders if this line means that Vimalaprabodha was the author or that the

book was in his possession.

śrīmaduttarapīthe tu śmaśāne karavīrake |
yonigahvaram uddhṛtya mantrasadbhāyvam uttamam ||
śrījñānanetranāthena bhutalasaṁprakāśitam |

(DP: śrīmaduītarapīṭhasya [k: śrīmaduttaraṁ-] śmaśānaṁ karavīrakam ḷ

pūjitaṁ devadevena śivena paramātmanā [k, kh: paramātmane; g: paramātmano] l| 3 |I
The cremation ground of the venerable Uttarapīṭha (is called) Karavīra, It is
worshipped by Śiva, who is the Supreme Soul and the God of the gods.

TANTRĀḶOKA

The Kālikāstotra by Jñānanetra
The first part of the development of the fully formed post-scriptural

Krama system begins with Jñānanetra and continues up to Abhinavagupta and
beyond. The most important text of this period is the Kramastotra by
Erakanātha, who was a disciple of Keyuravatī, a direct disciple of Jñānanetra.
Here the thirteen Kālīs of the Cycle of the Inexplicable (anākhyacakra) are
described and praised. Abhinavagupta wrote a commentary on it early in his life,
unfortunately lost, called the Kramakeli, confirming its unique importance. This

Kramastotra is presented in Appendix E. This period includes Abhinava’s own

important contribution, which is dispersed in his Trika works. Particularly
important is the presentation of the Twelve Kālīs in Chapter Four of the
Tantrāloka and Jayaratha’s extensive commentary. He also presents them in the
Tantrasāra and Tantravaṭadhanika. These are translated in the notes to the
translation. Abhinava also wrote a Kramastotra where they are described. This
is translated in Appendix F.
Indeed, the Krama teachings were developing rapidly in this period. The
fully developed form of the Krama system, expounded in the three works called
Mahānayaprakāśa — Light of the Great Teaching, was probably not known to
Abhinava. Reference to the system of sixty-five in the passage below may well
be an indication that its formation was incipient at an early stage of the
development of the Kālīkrama. The energies that constitute the Great Process —
Mahākrama — of the Great Teaching — Mahānaya — are indeed sixty-five, i.e., 64
Siddhas (= Bhairavas) and their energies (identified as Yoginīs or Śākinīs) and

their leader Maṅgalā, called Vṛṇdacakra (the Wheel of the Assembly, which
Sanderson translates as the Cycle of the Multitude,) or Śākinīcakra. Abhinava
certainly knew the roots from which it developed. Thus, in the PTv, he refers

extensively to the spheres of energy of the goddesses (also called yoginīs)

headed by Vāmeśvaṁī, namely, Khecaṁī, Gocarī, Dikcarī and Bhūcarī (see

Dyczkowski 1987: 129 ff.), which are amongst the spheres of energies taught in

the Great Teaching.

However, the cycle of Twelve Kaālīs, although important and well

known to the Great Teaching, is not at all as central as it is for Abhinava, who

understands this to be THE expansion of Kālasaṁkarṣanī, who is the Goddess of
Consciousness of the Great Teaching, who revealed it to its first exponent
Jñānanetra, alias Śivānanda. The big question is whether the Krama system
expoundedin the three Mahānayaprakāśas already existedin some form at the

beginning of the post-scriptural development initiated by him. Arṇasiṁha (also
called Vīrasiṁha), clearly states that he believed the description that it was all

originally taught by Jñānanetra (MNP A 135), as did the authors of the other
two Mahānayaprakāśas.
Sivānandanātha was considered to be the founder of the final form of
the Krama system, although in actual fact it preceded him. This is because
+. . . gṭoṭṟam (jñānanetrapādakr̥tam) K: NAK no. 5-5183 śaivatantra 157 =
NGMPP reel no. A 150/6; size: 32 1/2 x 12 1/2; folios are 35 and script is devanāgarī.

itthaṁ svarūpastutir abhyadhãyi samyak samãveśadaśāvaśena | mayā (śivenāstu) śivāya
samyag mamaiva viśvasya tu maṅgalākhye || || folio 21a. At the end: kṛtir iyaṁ

APPENDIX D CHAPTER FOUR

tradition maintains he received the teachings directly from the goddess
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, who appeared to him as Maṅgalā, a local goddess of Udḍiyāna.
This is so even though he also appears, as we have seen, as the fourth in the
lineage in the genealogy of teachers beginning with Niskriyānanda.
The sole independent work we have by Śivānanda is his Kālikāstotra. It
is not only a beautiful hymn; it is also dense with meaning. We have travelled a
fair way from Niṣkriyānanda’s Krama into a milder atmosphere. Even so, we are
closer to that than the final form of the Krama that we find in the three
Mahānayaprakāśas. There Krama idealism reaches its ultimate zenith in the
Mahānayaprakāśa, published in Trivandrum, of unknown authorship. At all
stages of its development, the fundamental view is maintained, namely, that
consciousness is the Deity. It is cognitive, and operates its perception of the
ideal universe it generates and withdraws through its activity. In its final phase,
we shall see that this activity is analysed in detail, as marked by the systematic
operation of assemblies of cognitive energies arranged in well-ordered spheres
of operation.
Although there is no trace of the earlier perception of the twelve Kālīs
as the rays of the Sun which is the thirteenth, that is the core and focus of the

Krama teachings in the earlier strata, even so, the model of the twelve with an

encompassing thirteenth is maintained. They continue to be the assembly of
energies of the Inexplicable phase of the dynamism of cognitive consciousness
and retain basic features of their identity. However, they are now just a part of a
larger, more detailed and complex layout. Thus, Śivānanda first refers to the
twelve Kaālīs as the twelve parts of the body of the Goddess Time, and then to
the thirteenth as encompassing them within herself, where they shine as one.'
Note that here, the twelve are formed by the standard phases of emanation,
persistence and withdrawal multiplied by themselves and a fourth phase which
is their ineffable 'repose’ (viśrāma) with consciousness, at one with it. There is
no detailed explicit reference to perception and its operation set into the
relationship between subject and object. Even so, despite the movement away
from the central role it hadin the early Krama, the closeness of Śivānanda’s
relationship to it is his reference to the goddess as Kṛśodarī. Thisis surprising,
as the tradition, when we get to the Mahānayaprakāśas, understands him to
have received the teaching from Maṅgalā, who is considered to be a form of

Sanderson perceives in this hymn the fully-fledged system that was
going to develop in the three Mahānayaprakāśas, of which the one by
Arṇasiṁha, presented in Appendix H below, is a good example. Sanderson

(2006b: 33-35) observes that in the Kālikāstotra by Jñānanetra, he does clearly

mention the goddesses Khecarī and the following three as the deities of the
sacred seat (pītha) of the core of consciousness which, in the fully developed
Krama, is the first of six phases. However, the following five are found,
according to Sanderson, but only as allusions. They are 1) the Assembly of the

Five Currents (pañcavāhacakra), 2) the Assemblies of Light (prakāśacakra), 3)
Bliss (ānandacakra), 4) the Form of Emptiness (khamūrticakra), and 5) the

Divine Current (divyaugha) of the lineage of the master (gurukrama) also called

'' See below, verses 5 and 6.
Verse 13.

TANTRĀLOKA

the Assembly of the Multitude (vrṇdacakra) or Śākinīcakra, comprising 64
Siddhas and their leader, Maṅgalā.

Sanderson translates accordingly, adding in brackets what he perceives
to be implied:
‘Supreme is the unique (kim api) act, surging up within, in which you
assume your form through your pure creative urge, the shining forth of that
consciousness absolute and spontaneous [as the cycle of the Five Flows]. Then
when you have projected all Time [through the cycles of Illumination and Bliss]
and [your] terrible manifestation as the [introverting] ego through the [cycle of]
Embodiment you eliminate this [ego through the rise of the cycle of the
Multitude vṛndacakram] and so accomplish liberation.’ (3-4)
Although it is possible that Jñānanetra had these categories in mind, it is
far from certain. They certainly do not appear in his two major sources, the

Kālikulakramasadbhāva and the Kālikulapañcaśatika, that Jayaratha calls the
Devīpañcaśatika. However, the thirteen (12 + 1) Kaālīs are, on the contrary, a

well-known configuration. Indeed, it is perceived to be the ultimate one.
Jñānanetra declares in the same Kālikāṣtotra that the Celestial Order —
divyaugha — pours out in these thirteen forms in the same five phases:
‘Supreme is the Mother (Kālī) who saves the world, pouring forth the
Celestial Order by dividing each of the thirteen forms into five.’

According to Sanderson, in verses eight and nine he alludes to the four

phaṣes that follow these five, that is, the cycles of emanation, persistence,
withdrawal and the fourth, the cycle of the Inexplicable (anākhyācakra), in
which the worship ends. In other words, this is what the whole process leads to
and is its culmination and highest point of development:
‘The unitary nature of (your) essence becomes triple in the aspects of
Emission, Stasis, and Withdrawal; each of these assume four aspects through
Emission, Stasis, Withdrawal and Rest. Supreme is your form, that by thus
dividing your spontaneous essence into twelve, sets in motion the whirl that is
your unfolding (vivarta) as the world.” (8-9)

Again, according to Sanderson, in verses five and eighteen, he venerates
the last of these. Sanderson translates:
‘Supreme are you, O Kālī who, after dividing the body of Time into
twelve, make that same nature shine forth within yourself as one.”
‘I praise the absolutely transcendent Goddess within that ground that

lies within the state (of the Inexplicable,) in which withdrawal itself is

withdrawal, who is untouched by the prolixities of the existent and the nonexistent that she projects; (she is) manifest in everything at every moment.”
We turn now to the Kālikāstotra by Jñānanetra.

' The point is that the 12 Kālīs are the manifestation of the thirteenth Kālī worshipped

in the centre.

APPENDIX D CHAPTER FOUR

sitatarasaṁvidavāpyaṁ sadasatkalanāvihīnam anupãādhi |
jayati jagattrayarūpaṁ nairũpaṁ devi te rūpam || 1 II
O goddess, Your formless form, which is the triple universe, devoid of
limitations and differentiation into being and nonbeing, completely pure,
ungraspable consciousness, is victorious.
ekam anekākāraṁ prasṛtijagadvyāptivikr̥tiparihīnaṁ |
jayati tavādvayarūpaṁ vimalam alaṁ citsvarūpākhyam || 2 ||
Your one nondual nature that is one and of many forms, devoid of the
alterations that pervade the universe of flux, perfectly pure and called the nature
of consciousness, triumphs!

jayati tavocchaladecchā yayā svasvarūpavigrahagrahaṇam |
kim api niruttarasahajasvarūpasaṁvitprakāśamayam || 3 I|
Victorious is Your will that surges up (perpetually)! By means of that,
(You) in some (inexplicable way) assume the form of Your own essential
nature, which is the most excellent (nirurtara) (absolute) and spontaneous
(sahaja) light of consciousness!
vāntvā samastakālaṁ [k: tva-] mūrtyāhaṁkāraghoramūrtim api |

nigraham asmin kṛtvānugraham api tu [k: missing] kurvatī jayasi l| 4 II
Having emitted all time as (Your) form (mirti), even though (Your)
form is fearsome as the (fettered soul’s) ego, having restrained (it) within this,
even as You are also bestowing (Your) grace, You are victorious!

kālasya kāli dēhaṁ vibhajya munipāñcasaṁkhyayā bhinnam |
svasmin virājamānaṁ tadrūpaṁ prakurvatī [k: kurvatī] jayasi || 5 II
O Kaālī, you are victorious (above all others)! Having divided up the
body of Time into twelve, (generating) that (which is your own) nature, You
make it shine radiantly within Yourself
(as one).

bhairavarūpī kālaṁ [k: kāla] srjati jagat kāraṇādikīṭyantam [k: -kīyantam] |
icchāvaśena yasyāḥ sā tvaṁ bhuvanāmvikā [k: stva-] jayasi || 6 l
You, who are the Mother of the Worlds, are victorious. Swayed by Your
will, Time, which is Bhairava, emits the universe beginning with (Śiva, its
universal) cause, up to (a tiny) insect.

jayati śaśāṅkadivārkapāvakadhāmatrayāntaravyāpi [k: -divāka-] |
janani tava kim api vimalaṁ svarūparũpaṁ paraṁ dhãma || 7 II

TANTRĀLOKA

O Mother, You whose ineffable (kim api) and pure nature is the
supreme abode that inwardly pervades the three abodes of Moon, Sun and Fire,

are victorious!

ekaṁ [k: evaṁ] svarūparūpaṁ prasarasthitivilayabhedatas trividham |
pratyekam udayasthitilayaviśrāmataś caturvidhaṁ tad api || 8 II
iti vapupañcakaṣaṁkhyaṁ [k: vamu-] vidhāya sahajasvarūpam ātmīyam |
viśvavivartāvartapravartakaṁ [k: -vivartāvivarta-] jayati te rūāpam || 9 ||
The one form of Your own nature (ṣvarūparūpa), divided into
emanation (prasara), persistence and merger, is of three kinds. Again, each one
(of these) is of four kinds, as (its) arising, persistence, merger and repose.
Having thus ordained that Your own innate (sahaja) nature numbers twelve
(aspects), (this) Your form (rūpa) that impels the continuous round of the

apparent change of all things, triumphs! (8-9)

The unitary nature of (your) essence becomes triple in the aspects of
emission, stasis, and withdrawal; each of these assume four aspects through
emission, stasis, withdrawal and rest. Supreme is your form, that by thus
dividing your spontaneous essence into twelve sets in motion the whirl that is
your unfolding (vivarta) as the world. (8-9)
sadasadvibhedaviṣṛter [k: -visṛter] dalanaparā kāpi sahajasamvittiḥ |
uditā tvam eva bhagavati jayasi jayādyena rūpeṇa || 10 ||
There is some (undefinable) innate consciousness (sahajasaṁvitti),

which is intent on destroying what is generated from the duality between being

and nonbeing. O Goddess, (when it) is manifest (uditā), it is You Yourself, Who

are victorious in the form (of the four goddesses) beginning with Jayā (jayādya)
(followed by Vijayā, Ajitā and Aparājitā).
jayati samastacarācaravicitraviśvaprapañcaracaṉormiḥ [k: -normi] |
amalīsvabhāvajaladhau śāntaṁ kāntaṁ ca te rūpam || 1] I|

Your tranquil and beautiful nature, the wave of the deployment of the

ongoing universe, wonderfully various with all that moves and is immobile,
triumphs in the ocean of (Your) stainless nature.

sahajollāsavīkāsaprapūritāśeṣaviśvavibhavaiṣā |
pūrṇā tavāmba mūrtir jayati parānandasaṁpūrṇā || 12 I|
O Mother, this Your iconic form (mirti), which is the glory of all the

universe, completely filled with the expansion of (Your) spontaneous (innate)
outpouring (sahajollāsa) and, full of supreme bliss, triumphs!

kavalitasakalajagattrayavikatamahākālakavalanodyuktā |

upabhuktabhāvavibhavaprabhavāpi tu [k: ] kṛśodarī jayasi l| 13 ||

APPENDIX D CHAPTER FOUR

Intent on devouring Mahākāla who, having swallowed up all the triple

universe, is terribly immense, You, O Kṛśodarī (Emaciated One), whose power

is the glory of Being (You) have enjoyed (and consumed) (upabhuktabhāva),
are victorious!

rūpacaryaparivarjitam asamaṁ [k: rūpatraya-] rūpatrayāntaravyāpi |

anubhavarūpam arūpaṁ jayati paraṁ kim api te rūpam || 14 |

Your supreme ineffable nature, devoid of form and deportment, without

equal, that inwardly pervades the three forms, the form of which is experience
without form, is victorious!

avyayam akulam ameyaṁ vigalitasadasadavivekakallolam |
[k: + jayati] prakāśavibhavasphītaṁ jayatīha [k: missingi] taveśi [k: deśāḥ]
paraṁ dhãma || 15 ||
O Goddess (īsī), Your supreme abode, extensive with the glory of the

Light (of consciousness), imperishable, transcendent, non-objective, from which
the wave of discrimination between truth and falsity (being and nonbeing) has
fallen away, is victorious here (in this world).
rtumunisaṁkhyaṁ rūpaṁ vibhajya pañcaprakāram ekaikam |
divyaugham udgirantī [k: udigarantī] jayati jagattāriṇī [k: jattāriṇī] jananī|| 16
The Mother Who is the saviour of the universe, having divided the form

numbering thirteen (units), each one into five parts, pouring forth the Divine
Current (of the teachings),' is victorious!
bhūdiggokhagadevīcakralasatjñānavibhavaparipūrṇam |
nirupamam acittamayaṁ [k: nirūpamavi ttamayaṁ] śrīpīthaṁ jayati te pītham

l 17 1|

Śrīpīṭha, Your sacred seat (pītha) which is No-mind, incomparable,
completely full of the glory of knowledge that is pouring out of the wheels of

the goddesses, Bhūcarī, Dikcarī, Gocarī and Khagā, triumphs!
pralayalayāntarabhūmau vilasati sadasatprapañcapariḥhīnām |

See following Appendix G concerning the currents (ogha) of the lineages of teachers
and their division into ‘divine’ (divya), ‘accomplished’ (siddha) and ‘human’
(mānuṣya).
Abhinava knows this group of four, which he mentions in the PTv p. 39-40. There is

no evidence that the configuration into five, with Vāmeśvarī as the highest above these
four, had emerged in his time or earlier. Even so, it became so well established so

quickly that Kṣemarāja treats it as the basic set in his Spandasaṁdoha (p. 18-21 in

Dyczkowski 1992: 68-70). Thus, looking back synchronically, we have two
progressions. One is that of the group of four (kramacatuṣṭhaya) and the other that of
the five-fold flux (pañcavāha).

TANTRĀLOKA

devīṁ [k: vīṁ] niruttaratarāṁ naumi sadā sarvataḥ prakaṭām [k: -tam] || 18 II

Ibow to the Goddess who, devoid of the phenomenal world of existence

and nonexistence, plays, pouring forth on the plane within the merger of
destruction (pralaya) (into eternal consciousness). She who, (completely
transcendent,) is greater than the most excellent, is always clearly apparent in all
respects (as everything at all times).

yādṛg mahāśmaśāne dṛṣṭaṁ devyāḥ svarūpam akulastham |

tādṛg jagattrayam idaṁ bhavatu tavāmba prasādena || 19 l|

May this triple universe be, by Your grace, as is the Goddess’s own
nature, which is established in transcendence (akulastha), as (l have) perceived
in the Great Cremation Ground.
itthaṁ svarūpastutir abhyadhāyi samyaksamāveśadaśāvaśena |
mayā śivenātra [k: missing] Śivāya samyag mamaiva viśvasya tu maṅgalākhye ||

20 1

O Maṅgalā! may the praise of (your) own nature that I, who am Śiva,

have expressed here (in this world) in this way, under the sway of the state of

perfect immersion (in Your nature) (samāveśa), bring true (samyak) peace (śiva)

to the whole world that is myself!

kṛtir iyaṁ śrījñānanetrapādānām iti ||
This is the work of the venerable Jñānanetra.

Appendix E
to Chapter Four

The Thirteen Kālīs of the Kramastotra by Erakanātha
There can be no doubt that in the original form of the teachings, the

Kaālīs of the domain of the Inexplicable, that is, of the Kālīkrama, were thirteen,
not twelve. We have seen that in the earliest Krama, the thirteenth is the one

form of the other twelve. This is true at this next stage of development; as the

DP puts it, ‘she is the Supreme Sun with twelve divisions.’ (DP 5/15) Jayaratha

vigorously and repeatedly defends the view that Abhinava did not interfere with

them, which is not true.

Abhinavas Trikakula mirrored an emergent development in the primary
sources, in the course of which the cycle of Twelve took an increasingly
independent identity. The distinction between the periphery — the Twelve Kaālīs
— and the centre — the thirteenth Kālī — is repeatedly emphasized in these terms
in the JY. In the account found in the CMSS the Twelve Kālīs continue to be
juxtaposed to the Kālī in the centre, but while she retains her identity, she is
understood to be an evanescent Void. There is no reference to her as the
‘thirteenth’, as we find repeatedly in the JY. Indeed, at the end of this passage,
where the Kālīs are listed, they are just twelve. These are the same twelve we
find in the JY and elsewhere in general, but no thirteenth is listed as one of
them. This is surprising at first sight. One is tempted to think that the system
here is one of twelve, not thirteen Kālīs. But this is not so. Here much emphasis
is placed on the interaction and relationship between the centre and the
periphery. The goddess in the centre is the Void of Consciousness (cidgagana,
cidvyoman). The Twelve at the periphery are as she is in the centre. Emptiness is
generated from the Emptiness that consumes it into its ever-expanding expanse
of pervasiveness, even as it is itself consumed by it. For this to work, the
‘thiṛteenth’ in the centre must be insubstantial. It is this kind of logic, it seems,

that drives Jayaratha to say, defending Abhinava’s presentation, that immanence
and transcendence are not separate from each other ‘like the horns on a bull’s
headʼ (TĀv 4/125). Even so, Jayaratha felt compelled to supply descriptions of
the Kālīs, which he did from what were probably the only sources he knew that
contained them that, that is, Devīpañcaśatika and the Kramastotra by
Erakanātha, both of which taught that there are thirteen Kālīs, not twelve.
The order and names of the Kālīs listed in the Devīpañcaśatika is the
same as the earlier sources; thus, we may justifiably infer that it was the same in
the lost Kramastotra. According to Jayaratha, the extra Kālī missing in the set of
‘twelve plus one’ normally found in the scriptural sources is Sukālī. He quotes
the Devīpañcaśatika for a description of that Kālī, but is silent concerning
whether she is included amongst the other Kālīs in the Kramastotra. When we
view these descriptions of the Kālīs without assuming that they form a
progression through objectivity to subjectivity, consuming them as they do so,
' Concerning the number and order of the Kālīs, see Jayaratha’s long discussion in TĀv

ad 4/173ab.

We have observed that in the CMSS, the missing Kālī out of the thirteen is the last
one, thus confirming that it continued to maintain the original twelve plus one model.

TANTRĀLOKA

the verses are easier to understand. The names of the Kālīs themselves suggest
their sequential order. Jayaratha has to agree, but explains the discrepancy away
by saying that this is the order in which they are worshipped, rather than the
sequence of the phases of the cognitive processes of consciousness that
Abhinava says they represent. As these two sources do not link the Kālīs to
phases of perception, as Abhinava and Jayaratha do, it may appear that it is
Abhinava’s idea or that of his Krama teachers. But we know that that is not s0,
because their relationship to the cycle of perception is already established right
from the earliest level in the Mādhavakula, although not worked out in detail.
For Abhinava, this association is not at all a minor detail. It a general

and universally applied principle of Abhinava’s exegesis that every aspect,
phase or process in a sequence of yogic events that constitute a Yoga, and so too
the elements, phases, location, offerings, the officiant himself, and of course, the
deity and the myriad things and matters associated with ritual and yogic activity,
are all the activity of consciousness in one form or another. Abhinava’s
exegesis, where appropriate, explains how this applies in particular instances.

The link with consciousness, its energies, volitional, cognitive or active, is

essential for the Yogas and the rites to be effective, whatever their goal or
purpose may be.
Abhinava changes the sequential order to make it fit better with his
understanding of the phases of the process of perception. Thus, the focus of the
original sources on the phases of the processes of creation etc. is shifted from
there to perception. If we restore the original order, we may make more sense of
what the two texts say about the Kālīs and how, to some degree, they relate to
one another. Freed from having to understand these descriptions in terms of
phases of the process of perception, we find that each Kālī is an embodiment of
the process of withdrawal and absorption, which is Kālī’s activity. Thus, in one
way we may look at them one after another in a sequence as part of a single
process. From another perspective, they are each the whole process. This is even
more true of the sequence from the point of view of consciousness, which is
called the Inexplicable because, as Abhinava himself stresses, one cannot talk
about the cycle of cognitive consciousness as being either sequential or

otherwise (TĀ 4/178cd-180ab).

For the convenience of the reader, I have indicated the three domains

into which the Kālīs are divided. However, one should bear in mind that as
Abhinava has altered the sequential order, they do not correspond to that one.
Jayaratha quotes the Kramastotra, as he does the DP, generally in accord with
the order found in the Tantrāloka. This makes the verses he quotes from these
sources more puzzling. Jayaratha adds further to the difficulty we have in
understanding how they square with Abhinava’s account when he abandons
even that sequential order and quotes the DP for his own mysterious reasons, in
yet another order, as noted in the footnotes of the body of the text of the
translation.
The goddess introduces her exposition of the Wheel of the Kālīs in the
Devipañcaśatika by explaining to Bhairava that she is going to tell him about
the Kālikākrama, which in this case is the sequence of the twelve and thirteenth
See JY 4/4/26cd-29ab quoted above.

APPENDIX E CHAPTER FOUR

Kaālīs, a teaching that has been transmitted by word of mouth through the
lineages of teachers and disciples. Although the apophasis of the dynamism of
Kālī’s nature is central here, as usual, it is not represented in such a powerfully

radical manner as it is in Niṣkrīyānanda’s teachings. This is so even though the
Devipañcaśatika declares itself to be a Tantra belonging to the lineage founded
by him.

The description of the thirteen Kālīs is found in chapter five. The

context tells us a great deal about the Kālīs, their nature, and particularly, how
they are worshipped. Comparing the account in the Mādhavakula, we see how
the same basic format of the initiation and worship has been maintained.
Accordingly, 1 have translated all of it. The edition is based on three
manuscripts. Those who are interested can refer to the bibliography for details.
The Krama teachings concerning the Thirteen Kālīs came to be the
focus of a branch of the developing Kālīkula, called the Tradition (krama) or
Family (kula) of the Goddess of the Sun (bhānvī). We are told below in a
reference quoted by Jayaratha’ that the ‘venerable author’ of the Kramastotra
belonged to the Bhāskarakula, which is a homonym. It clear that the form of the
Krama the author of the Kramastotra focuses on is centred on the Twelve Kālīs,
as is that of the Bhāskara- / Bhānavī -kula. This is the focus of Abhinava’s
Krama teachings. although he never refers to it in this way. It may well be that
its development at the scriptural level was taking place around the same time or
soon after, as Abhinava himself does not refer to the sources where this features.

Abhinava presents an exposition of the Twelve Kālīs in Chapter Four.
The brevity of his presentation is compensated by Jayaratha, who writes an
extensive commentary on this important topic. Jayaratha is very troubled
throughout his commentary by the evident discrepancy he observes in the
sequence of the Kālīs in Abhinava’s presentation and these and other sources.
He is obsessed by this problem, returning to it repeatedly in the course of his
commentary on the Twelve Kālīs. Jayaratha admits that all the Krama sources
basically agree on the number and sequence of the Kālīs. This is in fact true,
although they do not say what Jayaratha reports them as saying. Thus, we may
safely assume that the original sequence in the Kramastotra is the one we find in
the Jayadrathayāmala, which is the earliest source to which we have access, and
the Devīdvayardhaśatika that follows after it, both of which are quoted by
Jayaratha. However, Jayaratha supplies only the verses from the Kramastotra
and the DP that refer to twelve Kālīs, omitting Sukālī, as Abhinava does. When
the occasion arises to refer to Sukālī, Jayaratha only quotes the DP. This may
suggest that she was missing in the Kramastotra also, but this may not be so.
Sanderson (2007: 297) considers the Kramastotra by Erakanātha to be dedicated

to thirteen Kālīs, and refers to Jayaratha's mention of Sukālī as being with
reference to the verse he does not quote from the Kramastotra. However, the

Cidgaganacandrika (224-250) by Srīvatsa describes twelve Kaālīs, building on
the verses dedicated to them in the Kramastotra. The corresponding verses in
the CGC are in my notes to Jayaratha’s commentary, to which the reader is
referred.

See the Appendix D, above.
Comm. 4/173ab.

See TĀv ad 4/149cd-150a and ad 4/17 1-172.

TANTRĀLOKA

Jayaratha resolves the issue by first of all asserting that, despite all the
evidence to the contrary, the scriptural sources only talk about twelve Kālīs,
although he does concede that it may appear not to be so. Then in order to
account for the change in the serial order in Abhinava’s presentation with
respect to the one we regularly find in the sources, he distinguishes two
sequences of Kālīs. One is the order in which they are worshipped (pūjākrama).
The other is the order in which the twelve phases of the cycle of consciousness
arise that the Kālīs embody, which is the one that concerns Abhinava.

Below I have restored the sequence in which the Kālīs are worshipped.

This is the serial order followed by the Cidgaganacandrikā, thus confirming that

it is correct. We have noted that even although the CGC follows the
Kramastotra, it omits Sukālī. As Sukālī is invariably found in the scriptural
sources, it appears likely that the omission is in deference to Abhinava’s
presentation, which allows the homologization of the sequence of Kālīs to the
phases of the cycle of perception. This requires that it move through the spheres
of the object, the senses that are the means of perception and the perceiver.
Unsurprisingly, no such homologization is found in the original sources,
including the Kramastotra itself. Divested of Abhinava’s exegesis, the phases
there are only set in the rhythm of emanation and withdrawal within the
Inexplicable.

Withdrawal of Emanation
1) (1) Sṛṣṭikālī (withdrawal of the emanation of emanation)
kaulārṇavānandaghanormirāpām unmeṣameṣobhayabhājam antaḥ |
nilīyate nīlakulālaye (>līnakulālaye) yā tāṁ sṛṣṭikālīṁ satataṁ namāmi ||
I constantly worship Sṛṣṭikālī, Who is the wave (ūrmi) of dense
(uninterrupted) bliss of the Ocean of Energy (kaulārṇava), and contains
inwardly (within Herself) both the unfolding (of the universe when She opens
Her eyes) (unmeṣa) and (its) withdrawal (when She closes them) (meṣa) — She
Who merges (and, at rest, dissolves away) into the Abode of Energy that has

merged (into Śiva).

2) (3) Sthitināśakālī (withdrawal of the emanation of persistence)
vājidvayasvīkṛtavātacakraprakrāntasaṅghattagamāgamasthām |
Śucir yayāstaṁ gamito ‘arciṣā tāṁ śāntāṁ namāmi sthitināśakālīm |l
I bow to Sthitināśakālī (the Kālī of the Destruction of Persistence) Who,
tranquil, abides in the dynamic union (sarṅghatṭa) of the going and coming (of
the exhalation and inhalation) of the wheels of the wind (of the vital channels of
the breath of the chariot of the body), that has yoked (svīkṛta) the two horses (of

TĀv ad 4/148. CGC 221-224 is a commentary on this verse. The CGC is part of the

explanatory notes to the translation to which the reader is referred.

APPENDIX E CHAPTER FOUR

exhalation and inhalation), set out (on its journey). She by Whose (intense)
brilliance, (Fire) the Pure One, has set.
3) (5) Saṁhārakālī (withdrawal of the emanation of withdrawal)
unmany anantā nikhilārthagarbhā yā bhāvasaṁhāranīmeṣam eti |

sadoditā saty udayāya śūnyāṁ saṁhārakālīṁ [jh, t: -kālī] muditāṁ namāmi ||
I bow to blissful Saṁhārakālī Who, endless and containing all things, is

the Transmental (unmanī). She Who, perpetually active (satatoditā), in order to

dawn as (the Goddess) void (of all phenomena), closes in on Herself (nimeṣam

eti) the withdrawal of phenomenal existence.’

4) (2) Raktakālī (withdrawal of the emanation of the Inexplicable)
mahāvinodārpitamātṛcakravīrendrakāsṛgrasapānasaktām |
raktīkr̥tāṁ ca pralayātyaye tāṁ namāmi viśvākṛtiraktakālīm ||
I bow to Raktakālī (the Red Kālī), Whose form is all things, She Who is

reddened (with passion) when the (period of cosmic) dissolution ends (and
creation begins), She Who is attached to drinking the essence (rasa) of the blood

of the most excellent Heroes who offer it with great delight to the Circle of the

Mothers.

5) (4) Yamakālī (withdrawal of the persistence of emanation)
sarvārthasaṅkarṣaṇasaṅyamasya yamasya yantur jagato yamāya |
vapur mahāgrāsavilāsarāgāt saṅkarṣayantīṁ praṇamāmi kālīm ||

I bow to the Kālī Who, out of passion for the joyful sport of the Great

(feast of) Consuming (mahāgrāṣa) (all things) retracts (towards Herself and

aṣsimilates) (saṅkarṣayantī) the essential nature (vapus) of the subjugating

restriction (yama) that restrains the withdrawal of all things in order to control

the universe (jagato yamāya).
(5) Sukāī

6) (7) Mṛtyukālī (withdrawal of the persistence of perstence)
mamety ahaṅkārakalākalāpavisphāraharṣoddhatagarvamṛtyuḥ |

grasto yayā ghasmarasaṁvidaṁ tāṁ namāmy akāloditamṛtyukālīm ||
TĀv ad 4/150abc; CGC 225-226.
’ TĀv ad 4/152; CGC 227-228.

' TĀv ad 4/149-150a; CGC 229-230.

' TĀv ad 4/151; CGC 231-233.
' The verse from the Kramastotra concerning the fifth Kālī — Sukālī — is not quoted,

only mentioned. See CGC 231, quoted in the notes of the translation.

TANTRĀLOKA

I bow to Mṛtyukālī, Who has arisen from timeless (eternity) — (She Who

is) the voracious consciousness that has consumed (grasta) the death of pride

haughty with the ecstasy of the expansion (visphāra) of the host of energies of
the ego (that reflects that “this is) mine”.
7) (8) Bhadra / Rudrakāḥ (withdrawal of the persistence of withdrawal)
viśvaṁ mahākalpavirāmakalpabhavāntabhīmabhrukuṭibhramantyā |
yāśnāty anantaprabhavārciṣā tāṁ namāmi bhadrāṁ śubhabhadrakālīm ||
I bow to the auspicious one, the auspicious Bhadrakālī, Who devours

the universe with the radiant flame of Her endless power that moves with the
terrible knitting of Her eyebrows at the end of phenomenal existence, that
resembles the repose (between phases of creation) of a great aeon

(mahākalpa).

8) (10) Paramārkakālī (withdrawal of the persistence of the Inexplicable)
astoditadvādaśabhānubhāji yasyāṁ gatā bhargaśikhā śikheva |
praśāntadhāmni dyutīnāśam eti tāṁ naumy anantāṁ paramārkakālīm ||
I bow to that endless Paramārkakālī, (otherwise called) Bhargaśikhā

(the Sun Who is the Flame of Lord Śiva), within Whom the twelve suns (of the
senses) have risen and set, Who is like a flame (śikhā), the radiance (of which)
is extinguished in the peaceful abode (of pure consciousness).
9) (9) Mārtaṇḍakālī (withdrawal of the withdrawal of emanation)
mārtaṇḍam āpītapataṅgacakraṁ pataṅgavat kālakalendhanāya |
karoti yā viśvarasāntakāṁ tāṁ mārtaṇḍakālīṁ satataṁ praṇaumi ||
I bow constantly to Mārtaṇḍakālī, Who (consumes) to the end the
(aesthetic) essence (rasa) of all things, She Who generates the Sun (mārtaṇḍa)
that has drunk up the Wheel of the Sun (pataṅga) to serve, like a moth

(pataṅga), as fuel for the energy of (the Fire of) Time.

10) (11) Kālāgnirudrakālī (withdrawal of the withdrawal of persistence)
kālakramākrāntadineśacakrakroḍīkṛtāntāgnikalāpa ugraḥ |

kālāgnīrudro layam eti yasyāṁ tāṁ naumi kālānalaruḍrakālīm ||
I bow to Kālāgnirudrakālī, within Whom the Rudra of the Fire of Time
dissolves away, the fierce one Who is the aggregate (kalāpa) of (the energies) of

TĀy ad 4/154; CGC 234-235.

TĀv ad 4/158ab; CGC 236-238.

' TĀv ad 4/16167; CGC 239-240.
' TĀy ad 4/163; CGC 241-242.

APPENDIX E CHAPTER FOUR

the inner fire that has embraced (and absorbed into itself) the Wheel of the Sun

pervaded by the procession of time.

I salute the Kālī of the Rudra of the Fire of Time, Who is inflamed with

thousands of (fiery) forms (that rise out of) the Abode of Fire, She Who destroys

the entire universe and everywhere devours the body of death.

11) (12) Mahākālakālī (withdrawal of the withdrawal of withdrawal)
naktaṁ mahābhũūtalaye śmaśāne dikkhecarīcakragaṇena sākam ḷ

kālī mahākālam alaṁgrasantīṁ vande hy acintyām anilānalābhām ||
I praise Kālī Who, by Night in the cremation ground, where the great
elements (Earth and the rest) dissolve away, devours the Great Time, along with
the host of the congregation (cakra) (of Yoginīs) who move in the Void of the

directions; She Who, inconceivable, shines like a fire (kindled by) the wind

(anilānalābhā).

12) (13) Mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakālī (withdrawal of the withdrawal of
the Inexplicable)
kramatrayatvāṣṭramarīcicakrasañcāracāturyaturīyasattām |

vande mahābhairavaghoracaṇḍakālīṁ kalākāśaśaśāṅkakāntim |l

I praise Mahābhairavaghoracaṇḍakālī, She Who is beautiful with the
Moon (that shines) in the Void of Energy (kalākāśa), the essential being of the

Fourth state which is the skilful power (cāturya) to set in motion the wheel of
the rays of the architect (vāṣṛra) of the three processes (of emanation,

persistence and withdrawal).

' This is another verse concerning Kālāgnirudra, that follows on from the one quoted in

TĀv ad 4/168, quoted ad 4/173ab CGC 243-246.

' TĀv ad 4/169-170; CGC 247-248.
' TĀv ad 4/171-172; CGC 249.

Appendix F
to Chapter Four
The Kramastotra by Abhinavagupta
Abhinavagupta himself also wrote a Kramastotra' in which he describes
the Twelve Kālīs. After his concise description of them in Chapter Four of the
Tantrāloka, he describes them again briefly in his Tantrasāra, Tantroccaya and
Tantravaṭadhanikā. However, nowhere does he deal with them as extensively as
he does here in his Kramastotra. One of his first substantial works was a
commentary on Erakanātha’s Kramastotra. Clearly, it had made a deep
impression on him at an early age. Thus, it would be not be surprising if that
inspired the title of his own Kramastotra. Indeed, apart from the number and
order of the Kālīs, he follows the style of that Kramastotra, taking care for
example to write it in the same complex metre.
This is one of three works in which Abhinava does us the great favour
of giving us a date of its composition. He says that ‘I, Abhinavagupta praised
Śiva on the ninth day of the dark (fortnight) in (the month of) Mārgaśīrṣa during
the so called sixty sixth year. (30)ʼ. Note that he says that he did it on this day.
Are we to understand that he wrote all this deep and beautiful hymn in just one
day?
ayaṁ duḥkhavrātavrataparigame pāraṇavidhir
mahāsaukhyasāraprasaraṇarase durdinam idam |
yad anyanyakkṛtyā viṣamaviśikhaploṣaṇaguror vibhoḥ stotre

śaśvat pratiphalati ceto gatabhayam || 1 ||

This is the way (vidhi) to cross over (to the liberated state),

once

having understood the manner of life which is (this) mass of suffering.
(Experiencing) the savour of the essence of the expansion of Great Bliss, this
miserable day (of Māyā), which is its opposite, is reduced to naught. Thus, the
mind, freed from fear, is constantly reflected in the hymn to the Omnipresent
Lord, who is the teacher that burns up the rugged path (of fettered life).
vimr̥śya svātmānaṁ vimrśati puṇaḥ stutyacaritaṁ tathā
stotā stotre prakaṭayati bhedaikaviṣaye |
vimṛṣṭaś ca svātmā nikhilaviṣayajñānasamaye tad itthaṁ
tvatstotre 'ham iha satataṁ yatnarahitaḥ || 2 ||
Having reflected on himself, the one who lauds (You) reflects again on
(Your) laudable conduct (carita), and reveals it in the hymn that has as its

subject the oneness of duality. And so too is one’s own Self contemplated every
time knowledge of the objects of sense (viṣaya) (arises). In this way, free of
fatigue, I am always (present) here in your hymn.

' The Kramastotra was edited and published by K.C. Pandey 1963: 948-951.
The other two are the Bhairavastotra and vivṛtvimarśinī on the Iśvarapratyabhijña.

APPENDIX F CHAPTER FOUR

anāmṛṣṭaḥ ṣvātmā na hi bhavati bhāvapramitibhāj anāmṛṣṭaḥ
svātmety api hi na vinā 'marśanavidheḥ |

Śśivaś cāsau ṣvātmā sphuradakhilabhāvaikasarasas tato 'ham

tvatstotre pravaṇahṛdayo nityaṣukhitaḥ || 3 II

Oneʼ’s own Self, ignored (anāmṛṣṭi), does not rightly know existence.

(Indeed,) without the practice of awareness (there would be no knowledge,)

even that one’s own Self is being ignored. And Śiva is one’s own Self in the
oneness of feeling (rasa) with all of radiantly manifesting existence, and so, my
heart disposed to (uttering) Your hymn, I am constantly made joyful (sukhita).

3)

vicitrair jātyādibhramaṇaparipāṭīparikarair avāptam
sārvajñaṁ hṛdayaṁ yad ayatnena bhavatā |
tad antas tvadbodhaprasarasaraṇībhūtamahasi sphuṭam vāci
prāpya prakaṭaya vibhoḥ stotram adhunā || 4 |I
You have effortlessly attained the heart of the omniscient one by virtue

of the many varied discernments of (the true nature of) the series of (worldly)

errors such as caste and the like. Having attained that clearly within the great
power of speech, which serves as the path for the flow of your awakened
consciousness (bodha), now make the pervasive Lord’s hymn clear (and lucid).


vidhunvāno bandhābhimatabhavamārgasthitim imāṁ
rasīkṛtyānantastutihutavahaploṣitabhedām |
vicitrasvasphārasphuritamahimārambharabhasāt piban bhāvān

etāṉ varada madamatto 'smi ṣukhitaḥ || 5 II

Shaking off this abiding state on the path of phenomenal existence,
which is (rightly) considered to be bondage, and having turned it into the savour

(rasa) (of aesthetic delight), burnt away duality with the fire of endless praise
(stuti) by the impetuosity of the exertion of the glory that has flashed forth as his

own wonderfully varied expansion whilst drinking these phenomena (bhāva), O
bestower of boons, I, delighted (sukhitaḥ) (by You), am mad with inebriation
(mada).
bhava prājyaiśvaryaprathitabahuśakter bhagavato vicitraṁ
cāritraṁ hr̥dayam adhiśete yadi tataḥ |
kathaṅṁ stotraṁ kuryād atha ca kurute tena sahasā

Śivaikātmyaprāptau śivanatir upāyaḥ prathamakaḥ ll 6 |I

If the wonderfully varied activity (caritra) of the Lord, who possesses
many powers that have spread forth from (His) copious sovereignty over
phenomenal existence, come to rest in the Heart, then how is it possible to
compose a hymn?
Or, if one does so with (the power of that victorious) audacity (sahasa),

having attained oneness with Śiva, the first (and foremost) means (to realise
Him) is to bow with reverence (to Him).

TANTRĀLOKA

jvaladrūpaṁ bhāsvat pacanam atha dāhaṁ prakaṭanam
vimucyānyad vahneḥ kim api ghatate naiva hi vapuḥ |
stuve saṅvidraśmīn yadi nijanijāṁs tena sa nuto bhaven
nānyaḥ kaścid bhavati parameśasya vibhavaḥ || 7 II

Inflamed and shining, cooking, burning and making visible — nothing

else at all apart from the body of fire can do that. If I praise each one of my own
rays of consciousness, that which thus bows (in reverence) is none other than the

Supreme Lordʼs glory.

vicitrārambhatve galitaniyame yaḥ kila rasaḥ
paricchedābhāvāt paramaparipūrṇatvam asamam |
svayaṁ bhāsāṁ (> bhāsan) yogaḥ sakalabhavabhāvaikamayatāviruddhair
dharmaughaiḥ paracitir anarghocitaguṇā |l 8 II
That aesthetic savour (rasa), (experienced) when restrictions fall away

in the state of the wonderfully varied beginning is unconditioned, and so is
supreme plenitude without equal.
Self-luminous union (yoga), it is the oneness which is the essential

nature of all phenomenal existence that, with (its) streams of harmonious
atṭributes, is supreme consciousness that is priceless and delightful.

itīdṛkṣair rūpair varada vividhaṁ te kila vapur vibhāti
svāṁśe 'smin jagati gatabhedaṁ bhagavataḥ |
tad evaitat stotuṁ hṛdayam atha gīr bāhyakaraṇaprabandáhāś ca
syur me satatam aparityaktarabhasaḥ || 9 ||
O bestower of boons, Your body shines in many ways with such forms

within this, the Lord’s universe, which is as aspect (arṁśa) of Himself in which
He, (as Your body), is free of duality.

May my heart, speech and the series of outer senses be constantly
engaged in praising that itself, without (ever) giving up the force (of my
intention).
tavaivaikasyāntaḥ sphuritamahaso bodhajaladher
vicitrormiyrātaprasaraṇaraso yaḥ svarasataḥ |
ta evāmī sṛṣṭisthitilayamayasphūrjitarucāṁ

śaśān.kārkāgnīnāṁ yugapad udayāpāyavibhavāḥ || 10 ||
The wonderfully varied mass of waves (of creation) flows forth
spontaneously, (stimulated by its own inherent delight) as the aesthetic savour
(rasa) of the ocean of the oneness of Your consciousness, whose glory flashes
forth within.
These are the glorious expressions (vibhava) that simultaneously arise
and fall away of the Moon, Sun and Fire that are the flashing vibrant radiance
which is emanation, persistence and merger.

APPENDIX F CHAPTER FOUR

ataś citrācitrakramataditarādisthitījuṣo vibhoḥ śaktiḥ

Śśaśvad vrajati na vibhedaṁ katham api |

tad etasyāṁ bhūmāv akulam iti te yat kila padaṁ
tadekāgrībhūiyān mama hṛdayabhūr bhairava vibho ||I 1 1 |I
Thus, the state of the pervasive Lord is both various and not, dynamic
(krama) and (yet, at the same time) its opposite. (Ēven so, His) power never
becomes divided in any way at all. O Bhairava! Pervasive Lord! On that plane
your condition (pada) (is known as) Akula — may my heart be concentrated on

that! (1 1)

amuṣmāt saṁpūrnāt vata rasamahollāsasarasān nijāṁ śaktiṁ
bhedaṁ gamayasi nijecchāprasarataḥ |
anarghaṁ svātantryaṁ tava tad idam atyadbhutamayīṁ
bhavacchaktiṁ stunvan vigalitabhayo 'haṁ śivamayaḥ l| 12 ||
From this completely full lake of the great outpouring of aesthetic
savour (rasa), You divide Your own power by the extending flow (prasara) of
Your will. This is Your sinless freedom made of extraordinary wonder. As 1I
praise Your power, I am Śiva, free of fear.
idantāvad rūpaṁ tava bhagavataḥ śaktisarasaṁ

kramābhāvād eva prasabhavigalatkālakalanam |
manaḥśaktyā vācāpy atha karaṇacakrair bahir atho ghaṭādyais
tadrūpaṁ yugapad adhitiṣṭheyam aniśam || 13 ||
Your nature, Lord, like objectivity, is (potent) beautiful power that,
because it is devoid of succession (krama), is the intensely powerful (prasabha)
falling away of the passage (kalana) of time.
May I constantly take the support of that nature simultaneously along
with the power of the mind, speech, the wheels of the senses, and (so too, by
means of common) outer things, like jars.

kramollāsaṁ tasyāṁ bhuvi viracayan bhedakalanāṅṁ

svaśaktīnāṁ deva prathayasi sadā svātmani tataḥ |
kriyājñānecchākhyāṁ sthitilayamahāsṛṣṭivibhavāṁ trirūpaṁ
bhūyāsaṁ samadhiśayituṁ vyagrahr̥dayaḥ | 14 I|
Deploying the outpouring of succession on that plane, You unfold the
formation of diversity (bhedakalanā) between Your own powers within

Yourself. (You do s0) so that the agitated heart may preside over (and rest in)

the triple nature, which is the glorious power (vibhava) of persistence, merger
and the great emanation called action, knowledge and the will.

The Sphere of Objectivity
The original sources may divide the twelve Kālīs into three groups of four, but they
nowhere equate the three groups with the sphere of objectivity, that of perception and

subjectivity. This is Abhinava’s understanding of their domains. Although Abhinava

TANTRĀLOKA

1) Sṛṣṭikālī (the emantion of objectivity)
purā sṛṣṭir līnā hutavahamayṝ yātra vilaset
parollāsaunmukhyaṁ vrajati śaśisaṁsparśasubhagā |
hutāśendusphārobhayavibhavabhāg bhairavavibho taveyaṁ
sṛṣṭyākhyā mama manasi nityaṁ vilasatām || 15 ||
Initially, the supreme (parā) emanation is merged (in consciousness).

She is made of Fire that here, beautiful with its contact with the Moon, enters a

state of propense expectancy (aunmukhya) towards the supreme outpouring (of
manifestation). O pervasive lord Bhairava, who possesses the glorious power
(vibhava) of the expansion of both Fire and Moon, this is Your (Kālī) called
Sṛṣṭi. May she always play in my mind. (15)
2) Raktākālī (the persistence of objectivity)
visṛṣṭe bhāvāṁśe bahir atiśayāsvādavirase yadā
tatraiva tvaṁ bhajasi rabhasād raktimayatām |

tadā raktā devī tava sakalabhāveṣu nanu māṁ kriyād

raktāpānakramaghaṭitagoṣṭhīgataghṛṇam || 16 ||

Once the aspect of (phenomenal) existence has been emitted externally
and the most excellent (inner) savouring (āsvāda) (of consciousness has
become) insipid, if You then assume with force the nature of attachment (rakti),
You become the goddess Raktā in all Your emotive states (bhāva). May You
indeed make me free from aversion (gataghṛṇa) in the assembly formed (to

attend) the rite of drinking Raktā (the embodiment of the blood of the sacrificial
victim) (raktāpānakrama). (16)
3) Sthitināśakālī (the withdrawal of objectivity)
bahũirvr̥ttiṁ hãtuṁ citibhuvam udārãṁ nivasituṁ yadã
bhāvābhedaṁ prathayasi vinaṣṭormicapalaḥ (> -lam) |

sthiter nāśaṁ devī kalayati tadā sā tava vibho sthiteḥ
sāṁsārikyāḥ kalayatu vināśaṁ mama sadā || 17 ||

When You reveal the oneness of phenomenal existence, the fickle play

of (its) waves destroyed, in order to destroy the outer state (vṛtti) and reside on
the noble plane of consciousness, (You) the Goddess brings about the

destruction of persistence. May She then, O pervasive lord, always bring about
the destruction of the persistence of my transmigratory existence. (17)

does not refer to this exegetical model much in this hymn, nonetheless for the sake of
clarity and coherence with the account presented by Jayaratha in Chapter Four, I remind

the reader of these domains. The reader is invited to refer there for an account of each
one of the Kālīs, which is indeed coherent with Abhinava’s characterization of them in
this hymn.

APPENDIX F CHAPTER FOUR

4) Yamakāḹ (the inexplicable state of objectivity)
jagatsaṁhãreṇa praśamayitukāmaḥ svarabhasāt
svaśaṅkāṭaṅkākhyaṁ vidhim atha niṣedhaṁ prathayasi |
yamaṁ sr̥ṣṭvetthaṁ tvaṁ punar api ca śaṁkāṁ vidalayan
mahādevī seyaṁ mama bhavabhayaṁ saṁdalayatām || 18 ||

Desiring by Your own impetuousness to bring to rest (all things) by
withdrawing the universe, You cause injunction and prohibition, which is called
the affliction of one’s own doubt, to be perceived. Having emitted yama (the
restriction of rules and regulations), even as You are then again engaged in
destroying doubt, may this great goddess destroy my fear of phenomenal
existence (bhava). (18)

The Sphere of Perception
5) Saṁhārakālī (emanation of perception)

vilīne śaṁkaughe sapadi paripūrṇe ca vibhave gate
lokācāre galitavibhave śāstraniyame |

anantaṁ bhogyaughaṁ grasitum abhito laṁpaṭarasā vibho
saṅṁhārākhyā mama hṛdi bhidāṁśaṁ praharatu |I 19 l|
When the flux of doubts has dissolved away and (Your) glory is
completely full (and perfect) in a moment, when worldly life (lokācāra) has
ceased, and the regulations and power of scriptural injunction has fallen away, O
pervasive Lord, may (the Kālī) called Saṁhāra (who delights in) the aesthetic
savour of one who is greedy (laṁpaṭarasā) to gobble up the endless flux of
objects of enjoyment (completely) all around, strike down the part of duality in

my heart. (19)

6) Mṛtyukālī (persistence of perception)
tad itthaṁ devībhiḥ sapadi dalite bhedavibhave

vikalpaprāṇāsau pravilasati mātṛṣṭhitir alam ḷ

ataḥ saṁhārāṁśam nijaḥṛdi vimr̥śya sthitimayī
According to Monier Williams, the word ‘yama’, which basically means moral

restraint, has a range of meanings, including: “m. a rein, curb, bridle, a driver,
charioteer, the act of checking or curbing, suppression, restraint, restraint of words

(silence), self-control, forbearance, any great moral rule or duty (as opposed to niyama,
a minor observance; ten yamas are mentioned, sometimes only five, (in Yoga) self-

restraint (as the first of the eight ancillaries of Yoga); any rule or observance. It is also

the name of the god of death, who judges the actions of the dead, consigning them their

appropriate reward or punishment.
In this context, ‘yama’ is the mistaken notion (vikalpa) that vacillates between

right and wrong, restraining the person subject to it by the restrictions of moral law and

regulations. In this, the fourth station of the cycle of perception, which is that of the
inexplicable in the domain of objectivity, yama is the uncertainty of what is right and
wrong, and as a consequence, what one should do.

TANTRĀLOKA

prasaṅnnā syān mṛtyupralayakaraṇī me bhagavatī || 20 ||
When the goddesses have in this way destroyed the power of duality in

an instant, the abiding state of the perceiver, of which the (very) life is

conceptualization (vikalpa), can (alam) play joyfully. Thus, having
contemplated the aspect of withdrawal within in one’s heart, may She who is my

Goddess (bhagavatī) who destroys death, and whose nature is persistence, be
pleased. (20)
7) Bhadra/Rudrakālī (the withdrawal of perception)

tad itthaṁ te tisro nijavibhavavisphāraṇavaśād avāptāḥ
saṭcakrakramakṛtapadaṁ śaktaya imāḥ |
kramād unmeṣeṇa pravidadhati citrāṁ bhavadaśām imābhyo
devībhyaḥ pravaṇahṛdayaḥ syām gatabhayaḥ || 21 I|

The plane created in this way by the Krama of the six wheels (of the

first six Kālīs) are these, Your energies, that have been attained by the unfolding
of Your own glorious power (vibhava) of (withdrawal), the third (state). By
unfolding in due order (kramāt), (Bhadrakālī) bestows a strange (and wonderful)

state (daśā) in the world. May I, whose heart is inclined to devotion, be freed

from fear by these goddesses.

imāṁ rundhe bhūmiṁ bhavabhayabhidātaṅkakaraṇīm imāṁ

bodhaikāntadrutirasamayīm cāpi vidadhe |

tad itthaṁ saṁrodhaṁ drutim atha vilupyāśubhatatīr
yatheṣṭaṁ cācāraṁ bhajati lasatāṁ sā mama hṛdi |I 22 ||
I am blocking this plane which causes mental distress due to the duality
and fear of phenomenal existence. So too, I ordain this (state) which is the
inwardly melting juice (of the aesthetic delight) (rasa) at one with awakened
consciousness. Having destroyed in this way blockage, flux and the inauspicious
mass of sacrificial rites (1ati), she behaves (freely) as she wishes. May She play
in my heart! (22)

8) Mārtanḍakālī (the inexplicable state of perception)
kriyābuddhyakṣādeḥ parimitapade mānapadavīm avāptasya

sphāraṁ nijanījarucā saṁharati yã |

iyaṁ mārtaṇḍasya sthitipadayujaḥ sāram akhilam haṭhād
ākarṣantī kṛśatu mama bhedaṁ bhavabhayāt || 23 ||
She withdraws (each time), in accord with her own desire, the

expansion of the plane of the means of knowledge within the plane of limitation
of the senses of knowledge and action of one who has attained (that), dragging

by force (haṭhāt) the entire essence of Mārtaṇḍa, who is on the plane of

persistence. May she drag my duality out of the fear of phenomenal existence.

(23)

APPENDIX F CHAPTER FOUR

The Sphere of Subjectivity
9) Paramārkakālī (The emanation of subjectivity)

samagrāsakālī’ kramavirahitā sātmani muhur

niveśyānantāntarbahalitamahāraśminivahā |
parā divyānandaṁ kalayitum udārādaravatī prasannā me
bhūyāt hṛdayapadavīṁ bhūṣayatu ca || 24 1|
Having penetrated within Herself instantly at each moment (muhur), the
Kālī who, devoid of succession, consumes everything equally is a multitude of
great rays that, endless, inwardly grow compact (and strong). May she, the
Supreme (Goddess) Parā who is the receptacle of (the most) exalted respect, be
pleased with me to generate divine bliss, and adorn the plane of (my) heart.


10) Kālāgnirudrakāḹī (the persistence of subjectivity)
pramāṇe saṁlīne śivapadalasadvaibhavavaśāt
Śarīraprāṇādir mitakṛtakamātrṣṭhitimayaḥ |

yadā kālopādhiḥ pralayapadam āsādayati te tadā devī yāsau

lasati mama sā syāc chīvamayṝ || 25 ||

When the means of knowledge has merged (into consciousness) by the

glorious power that is playing on Śiva’s plane, if the body and the vital breath
etc. and the adjunct of time, which is the abiding state (sthiti) of the limited,

artificial perceiver, attains the play of destruction, may the goddess who flashes
forth playfully (lasati) then, be for me of Śiva’s nature. (25)
11) Mahākāḹī (the withdrawal of subjectivity)
prakāśākhyā saṁvit kramavirahitā śūnyapadato
bahir līnāty antam prasarati samācchādakatayā |
tato 'py antaḥsāre galitā rabhasād ākramatayā mahākālī
seyaṁ mama kalayatāṁ kālam akhilam || 26 ||
Consciousness, called Light, devoid of succession, merges externally
and flows internally from the plane of the Void as that which covers over (and
obscures all duality). Then also, as free of succession, She falls away into the

inner essence with great force. May this Mahākālī generate (and process) all my
(allotted) time. (26)

12) Mahācaṇḍograkālī (the inexplicable state of subjectivity)
tato devyāṁ yasyāṁ paramaparipūrṇasthitijuṣi kramaṁ
vicchidyāśu sthitimatirasāt saṅvidadhati |
pramāṇaṁ mātāraṁ mitim atha samagraṁ jagad idaṁ sthitāṁ
Read samagrāsakālī for samagrāmakṣālīṁ.

TANTRĀLOKA

kroḍīkṛtya śrayatu mama cittaṁ citim imām || 27 ||
Then having suddenly severed the process (krama) within the goddess,
whose abiding state is supreme and completely full, by the aesthetic savour
(rasa) of the consciousness (mati) of stable continuity (sthiti), She ordains (the

operation of) the means of knowledge, perceiver, perception and all this
universe, having encompassed (them all). May she reside in my mind (citta),
which is this abiding (srhitā) consciousness (citi). (27)
anargalasvātmamaye maheśe tiṣṭhanti

yasmin vibhuśaktayas tāḥ |

taṁ śaktimantaṁ praṇamāmi devaṁ

manthānasaṁjñaṁ jagadekasāram || 28 II
I bow to the god called Manthāna (Bhairava), the one essence of the
universe, Who is the possessor of those energies of (His) glorious power that
abide within the Great Lord who is my own unfettered Self.
itthaṁ svaśaktikiraṇaughanutiprabandhān ākarṇya
deva yadi me vrajasi prasādam |
tenāśu sarvajanatāṁ nijaśāsanāṁśusaṁśāntitākhilatamaḥpaṭalāṁ vidheyāḥ || 29 ||
O God, having heard in this way the continuing series of praises of the
current of the rays of Your own powers, if You become propitious to me, may
You quickly quell by that (grace) the entire veil of darkness of all humanity with
the rays of Your teachings.

satṣaṣṭinām eke varṣe navyamyām asite 'hani |

mayā 'bhīnavaguptena mārgaśīrṣe stutaḥ śivaḥ || 30 |
iti śrī abhinavaguptapādācāryakṛtaṁ kramastotraṁ sampūrṇam ||
I, Abhinavagupta praised Śiva on the ninth day of the dark (fortnight) in

(the month of) Mārgaśīrṣa during the sixty-sixth year.

Thus, the Kramastotra composed by the venerable Abhinavagupta is
complete.

Appendices G, H and I
to Chapter Four
The Final Form of the Krama System
The final development of the fully formed Krama system is
consolidated in three texts that are all called Mahānayaprakāśa — the Light of
the Great Teaching. Abhinava makes no reference to this developed form of the
Krama, and so it appears that it had not yet emerged in his time. But this is far
from certain. The earliest of the three was written in old Kashmiri and
commented on in Sanskrit by Śitikaṇṭha. It has been published in the Kashmiri

Series of Texts and Studies. Sanderson has argued that, although it is commonly
assumed that the author and commentator are the same person, this is far from
certain. The colophons identity the author of this Mahānayaprakāśa as

One of the other two is anonymous, and there is no concrete evidence of
where it was written except the circumstance that the sole manuscript is found in
Trivandruṃm. The other Mahānayaprakāśa, by Arṇasiṁha, was most probably
South Indian, as are the Krama works written after them that have survived.
These are two. The first of these is the Cidgaganacandrikā, followed by the
Mahārthamañjarī — the Bouquet of (the Teachings of the) Mahārtha — of
Maheśvarānanda, who quotes it. The latter is composed in seventy verses in old
Mahārāṣṭrian. Maheśvarānanda claims that it was revealed to him directly by the
Goddess. He translated the verses and wrote an extensive commentary in
Sanskrit.
Maheśvarānanda tells us that he lived in the land of the Colas, that is,
modern Tamil Nadu. Perhaps he came from Mahāraṣṭra and the goddess spoke
to him in his native language. He was the grand-disciple of Sivānanda, the
author of the Artharatnāvali, the earliestt commentary
on the
Nityāṣoḍaśikārṇava, the root and probably the oldest Tantra of the Śrīvidyā
tradition. Śivānanda was very learned in Kashmiri Śaivism and commented on
the NSA from that point of view. In the Mahārthamañjarī, Maheśvarānanda
presents a synthesis of the fully developed Kashmiri Śaivism — broadly called
Trika — and the Krama, that he refers to as its close relative (sodara), with the
teachings of the Śrīvidyā tradition (saubhāgya-saṁpradaya) that had emerged
hardly two generations before him. To this end, Maheśvarānanda presents a
summary of the main tenets of the fully formed Mahārtha, which he draws from
Arṇasimha’s Mahānayaprakāśa. Sanderson has demonstrated that the
Cidgaganacandrikā by Śrīvatsa elaborates on the Mahānayaprakāśa of
Arṇasiṁha. Thus, this was clearly an influential work in South Indian on the

Krama system.
We know from the many citations Maheśvarānanda makes of the
existence of a good number of Krama works belonging to this final phase, many
written by Maheśvarānanda himself. Some, probably redacted in Kashmir, were
known to Kṣemarāja. An important one is the Kālikākrama, which he quotes in

several places. Unknown to Abhinava, it seems that this Krama text, as well as

The colophons begin: iti śrīśitikaṇṭhācāryaviracite mahānayaprakāśe.

TANTRĀLOKA

others Kṣemarāja quotes that are not cited by his teacher, were written after
Abhinava wrote on Trika. Apart from the ‘allusions” Sanderson has identified in
Śivānanda’s Kālikāstotra, that we have examined, there is little in the earlier

Kālīkula works that can be said to indicate directly an articulation of the
complex system elaborated in the Mahānayaprakāśas, although the basic
constituents are indeed prefigured to some degree, as we have seen. The core is
already presented in what is probably one of the last Tantras of the second phase
in the scriptural substratum: the Kramasadbhāva. The importance of this text in
this respect is acknowledged by Śithikaṇṭha. A fragment has been recovered in
one Nepalese manuscript. Another part of it is preserved in a chapter of a
Kubjikā Tantra called the Kulakaulinīmata. There too we find confirmation that
it is expounding a prototype of this developed form of the Krama.
Another Mahānayaprakāśa, probably the last in time, is by an
anonymous author. There is only one manuscript of this text, which was
recoveredin the library of Trivandruṃ University. It was published by Gaṇapati
Śāstrī with extensive emendations. It certainly postdates Abhinava but precedes
Jayaratha, who quotes it. t differs from the other two because it is extensively
influenced by Abhinava’s exegetical models and tools. The author knows the
classification of the forms of descent of the power of grace (śaktipāta) Abhinava
elaborates in Chapter Thirteen of the Tantrāloka, inspired by his teacher
Śambhunātha (Sanderson 2006: 672). He is well conversant with the
classificationin categories of means to realization (upāyabheda). In particular,
he regularly refers to Anupāya as elaborated by Abhinava, that is, as recognition
(which is the Pratyabhijñā view) that comes in a flash of intense transmission of
insight (saṅkramaṇa) (which is the Krama view). This is particularly striking,
because sudden enlightenment through direct transmission (saṁkrāma) is a

major theme of the Krama teachings from their incipience. Abhinava reinforced
the doctrine and found a place for it in his classification of the means to

realization as ‘No Means’. Our anonymous author correlates it to Abhinava’s

distinctive conception of Anuttara, and regularly identifies it, as Abhinava does,
with Anupāya. Again, we observe the regular application of the fundamental
concepts of the Pratyabhijñā. These include the characterization of
consciousness as Light (prakāśa) and Awareness (vimarśa) as the two aspects
and plenitude of its subjectivity (ahaṁbhāva) as AHAṀ. The other two
versions, true to the original Krama view, maintain that the dynamism of

consciousness is free of the restrictions of any and all forms of the ego
(nirahaṁkāra). Indeed, it is by the elimination of the ego that consciousness and

its energies are free to expand to their complete potency.
Along with this basic view of an ultimate subjectivity, the analysis of
perception with which consciousness is identified as the dynamic interplay of
the triad of subject, object and means of knowledge is also taken over from
Abhinava’s exegesis. Accordingly, this Mahānayaprakāśa teaches that the
Twelve Kālīs are markers of phases in the cycle of cognitive consciousness
which is the Goddess and ultimate reality, as Abhinava does. This passage is

MNP (ŚiKa) p. 86.

. pañcavāhakramaṁ [n: pañcavāhu-] hyetat [ṅ: hotat] kathitaṁ tava śobhane |
KuKauM 15/159ab.

See comm. on TĀ 4/125.

APPENDIX Ġ,H, I CHAPTER FOUR

presented in Appendix I. These and related features are entirely absent in the

other two Mahānayaprakāśas that thus maintained the basic original form of
these Krama teachings.

Appendix G

to Chapter Four
The EarlyKrama Gurus and their Consorts
Niṣkriyānandanātha
Vidyānandanātha

Jñānadīpti
Raktā

Śivānanda

Samayā

Śakyānanda

Mahānandā

The Krama Lineages according to the Kramakeli
The following is a table of the Krama Teachers as reported by Abhinava
in_his commentary Kramakeli on the Kramastotra, reproduced by Jayaratha in

TĀv 4/173ab.

Pītheśvarīs of the Uttarapīṭha
Śivānanda (Jñānanetra)
Madanikā

Keyūravatī Kalyāṇikā

Govindarāja

Bhānuka

Somāṇanda

rakaṇāḍha (Naverakanātha Hrasvanātha)

Ujjata and Udbhaṭṭa onwards

Bhaāja

Athnavaṣupia
There are two other chronologies of Krama teachers apart from the one
in the Kramakeli. The first is found in the Mahānayaprakāśa, that is commented
' Hrasvanātha’s name occurs in the context of a discussion concerning the number of

disciples Keyūravatī (also called Kakāradevī) had. Jayaratha refutes an earlier view that
she had only three pupils. Instead of Somaraja, he mentions Bhojarāja as the sixth.
Therefore, if we accept him as a pupil of Keyūravatī he, like Erakanātha, would belong

to the close of the tenth century AD. However, the text is not clear whether they were

contemporaries or successors. Jayaratha maintains that Hrasvanātha, Bhojarāja and
Somarāja succeeded one another. He points out that Hrasvanātha quotes Somarāja, and

so precedes him, as he does Bhojarāja, who was Somarāja’s teacher.

Jayaratha says: hrasvanāthenāpi svalipivivaraṇe asya pāthasya dṛṣṭatvāt | TĀv
ad 4/206. Correcting hrasvanāthenāpi for hrasvanāthasyāpi, then it would mean that
Hrasvanātha had written a commentary on the Kramastotra, and that Jayaratha had seen
the original in his handwriting. He saw the second verse praising Kālānalarudrakālī

there in it. Accordingly, he asserts that in the Kramastotra both the goddesses Yamakāli
and Kālāgnirudrakālī were praised in two verses.
This is Jayaratha's lineage.

APPENDIX G CHAPTER FOUR

upon by Śitikaṇṭha. The other one is in the Mahānayaprakāśa by Arṇasiṁha,
which is several generations later. Sitikaṇṭha tells us that Jñānanetranātha
received the teachings from Makāradevī, that is the goddess Maṅgalā, who is
accordingly called the 'first teacher'. Maṅgalā was a local goddess in Udḍiyāna,
where the first transmission took place. She is identified with the goddess
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. According to this Mahānayaprakāśa, there are three levels or

‘currents’ of transmission of the teachings. The first is the Siddhaugha — the

Accomplished Current, which is the goddess Maṅgalā herself, who is the first
teacher. The second current is the Mānavaugha, the Current of Men, which is
represented by Netrarājñ, that is, Jñānanetra, whose ‘Eye is the Queen’ʼ, i.e., the
goddess and Hrasvanātha. These three are the ‘firestick of Kula’, that is, a
particular special lineage (ovalliviśeṣa), and so are like the three sacred fires of
the Vedic sacrifice. At the end of the Current of Men comes the Śiṣyaugha — the
Current of Disciples, of which the first and foremost teacher was the venerable
Bhānu (i.e. Cakrabhānu), who had eight disciples, out of which the greatest was

the Queen (rājñī) called Īśānikā.’ Cakrabhānu — the Sun of the Lotuses —— was

given this name because he made the lotus-like consciousness of his disciples
bloom, as does the rising sun.® Clearly, in this account, as in the one reported by

|| MNP (ŚiKa) p. 49. sśrīmanmakāradevyāḥ pīthavare prāptādeśena
śrījñānanetranāthena vāhyāntarastham ādidevīṣvarūpa-satattvaṁ yat sākṣātkṛtaṁ tad
eva bhūtadayāviṣṭena satā kramārthatayā kathanapūjanābhyāṁ vāntam - iti
ovallīsūcanam, tad eva prastūyate || 9 I|
Commenting on verse nine, Śitikaṇṭha writes: ‘the venerable Jñānanetra, who
had obtained the command of the venerable goddess Makāra in her most excellent seat,
had a direct experience (there of her) true nature as the first (and foremost) goddess,

present both internally and externally. Penetrated by compassion for living beings, it

was that itself that was emitted by speech and worship as the (reality, purport and) goal
of the Krama (kramārtha). The lineage of (the tradition) (ovalli) has been indicated in

this way and it is that which is being presented.”
śrīmakāradevī ādigururūpā jīyāt | suprabuddhaśrīmaṅgalārūpeṇa ādidevataiva vivṛtā

- iti ṣṭutr āṣūtritā | 2

MNP (ŚiKa) p. 5.

sā ca siddhaugharūpā mānavaugha (> -ghe) netrarājñī hrasvanātheti trirūpasya

kulāraṇiḥ - kulasya ovallīviśeṣasya araṇiḥ, trayāṇām agnīnām iva utpattisthānam, tataś
ca manavaughasyānte

yanmadhyād

(+

samadattaṁ .pāramparyanidānam

l 5 1.

(The Goddess) is the Siddhaugha (the Current of the Accomplished).

Netrarājñī and Hrasvanātha are part of the Mānavaugha (the Human Current). This is
the firestick with three forms. The firestick of (this) particular lineage (ovalli) of the

three that are present (here) are as if the three (sacred) fires. And then at the end of the
Human Current, at the beginning (and foremost) of the Śiśyaugha (the Current of
Disciples) comes the venerable Bhānu, who is the lord of eight disciples. In the midst of
the is the queen (rājāī) called Īśānikā, (to whom) the treasure of the teachings of the
series (of teachers) was given. (ibid. p. 107 commentary on verse 5).

yathā mahādevaḥ aṣṭānāṁ mūrtīnāṁ vikāsakaḥ, brahmā vā tāvatāṁ prajāpatīnām,
aruṇodayo

tāvato

diṅmaṇḍalasya,

śiṣ.yakamalānāṁ vikāsakaḥ, iti | 6 |

tathaiva

Sśrīcakrabhānuḥ

TANTRĀLOKA

Jayaratha from the Kramakeli and, as we shall see, in the one by Arṇasiṁha,
Cakrabhānu was a turning point in the transmission of the Krama teachings.

Moreover, as he is the last mentioned here, he may well have been the teacher of

the author of this Mahānayaprakāśa. If ṣo, it is quite possible that he was one of
his eight disciples. Certainly, whether this is true or not, he preceded
Abhinavagupta. If that is so, one wonders why Abhinava shows no sign of
knowing the fully formed Krama system. Indeed, even Kṣemarāja, who
repeatedly exalted the Krama system as the most elevated secret tradition
integrated into Trika and, particularly, into the post-scriptural Śivasūtra and
Spandakārikā, does not supply any evidence that he knew it in its final form.
We can be fairly sure of Cakrabhānu’s date, as Kalhaṇa refers to him in

the following passage in his Rājataraṅginī as living during the reign of

Yaśaskara, that is, 939 to 948 CE:

‘The king (Yaśaskara) [was ever] ready to exercise control over the
castes and conditions of life [among his] subjects. On discovering that at a
cakramelaka [i.e., a gathering of male and female initiates] a Brahmin ascetic
Cakrabhānu by name had departed from proper conduct, the king, in accordance
with the law, punished him by having the mark of a dog’s foot branded on his
forehead. Infuriated by this, the uncle of that [Brahmin], the magician

Vīranātha, who was the king’s own minister of foreign affairs, then took

revenge upon him.”

Śivānanda was three generations before Cakrabhānu, and so lived
somewhere around 825 to 900 CE. Five generations separate Cakrabhānu from
Arṇasimha. Allowing for the usual twenty-five years for each generation, he
lived about 125 years later, that is, around 1100 CE. Arṇasiṁha supplies us with
an account of his Krama lineages, ending with his two teachers, Somesśvara and

Nāga. Both are the fourth generation after Cakrabhānu, who is the third
generation after Śivānanda. The two lineages are given below.
The other Māhānayaprakāśa īs by Arṇasiṁha, who is also called
Vīrasiṁha. Arṇasiṁha probably lived in South India towards the end of the
11th century. Arṇasiṁha tells us (in verses 151-166) that there were two
etādṛśī ovallīmāṁ paramparā uditā satī dṛśyate, sā ca nirvikārā upāyasaraṇiḥ,
andhakāre dīpamāleva svaparaprakāśikā dyotate, iti - siddhaugha - mānavaugha -

sśiṣyaughāḥ l 7 |I

‘Juṣt as Mahādeva is the one who unfolds (the consciousness) of the eight
divine forms (mūrti) or Brahmā, the same (number of) Prajāpatis, or the rising sun
(aruṇodaya), the circle of the directions, in the same way Bhānu, that is, the venerable
Cakrabhānu, unfolds the lotuses (of the hearts of his) disciples.
Such is the series (of teachers) of the lineages that is perceived when it is risen.
And it is the undistorted path which is the means (to realisation), like a garland of lamps

in the darkneṣs, it illumines itself and others. Such are the Currents (called) Siddha,
Mānava and Śiśya. (ibid. p. 108 commentary on verses 6 and 7)

RT 6/108-110.

Unfortunately, the final colophon in this Mahānayaprakāśa īs lacunose where the name of
the author was written. However, he tells us directly that he is Amasiṁha in one place
and elsewhere (135) he says that the teaching concerning Vṛndacakra was originally taught
by Jñānanetra and was later revealed by Vīrasiṁha, which probably meant himself.

APPENDIX G CHAPTER FOUR

lineages of teachers who transmitted the Kālīkrama. The first begins directly

with the goddess Maṅgalā, who manifested in ‘Udḍīśa's seat’ (i.e., Oḍḍiyāna) to

Jñānanetra, whom he calls Śivānanda. The transmission of the Devatānaya then
continued down through Keyūravatī to Vāmana, then Cakrabhānu, who

belonged to the middle of the tenth century, then Iśanikā to Nandaka through
Sajjana to Someśvara.
The other line begins with Cakrabhānu, who wrote the
Pīṭhadvādaśikāstotra. He initiated Prabodhanātha, who wrote the Aṣṭikāstotra,

and may have been the Vimalaprabodha who wrote the unpublished
Devīdvyardhaśatika quoted by Jayaratha, and a Kālīkulakramārcana, which is a
ritual manual for the worship of this Kālīkrama. Prabodhanātha initiated Jayaka,
after whom the line continued through Paiṅka, then Nāga to Arṇasiṁha.


Summing up, the first lineage is as follows:


Śivānandanātha > Keyuravatī > Vāmana > Cakrabhānu > Īśānikā > Nandaka >
Sajjana > Someśvara > Arṇasiṁha

The second lineage is:

Cakrabhānu > Prabodha (nātha) > Jaiyaka > Paṅka > Nāga > Arṇasiṁha.

AIl these teachers are said to have been penetrated and possessed
(samāviṣṭa) by the Deity (samāveśa), immersed in Emptiness and experienced
the Great Wonder. In addition to this, some are positively characterized as
Kāpālika ascetics. Thus, he says of Cakrabhānu that ‘practicing the Great Vow
(mahāvrata), he attained the supreme abode.’ (156) Īśānikā, his direct disciple,

was a female ascetic who was ‘adorned with the five insignias’ of a Kāpālika
(157). Similarly, another of his disciples — Jaiyaka — was a Kāpālika who
observed the same Great Vow (mahāvratin).

Abhinava was certainly well acquainted with the basic Krama principles
concerning the cycles of emanation and destruction. He knew the main

goddesses — Khecarī, Vāmeśvarī, and Bhūcarī — whose nature he expounds as

energies of consciousness and perception in his commentary on the
Parātriṁśikā. However, he shows no signs of knowing about the elaboration of
the Krama system (that is, the Pañcavāha) we find in the three texts called

Mahānayaprakāśa (see below). Even Kṣemarāja, his disciple, does not seem to

know about it, although he refers frequently to Krama concepts. In short, it
appears that the system was developing, and texts were being added to it after
Abhinava’s time and that of his immediate successor.

‘’MNP (A) 152-161, 162-168.

Appendix H
to Chapter Four

The Mahānayaprakāśa by Arṇasimha
In Praise of the Goddess of Consciousness
sarvottīrṇasvarūpāpi kācid ekānapāyinī |

vibhāti sarvagā saṁvin nānātvena sadoditā || 1 ||
Although transcending all, (the one) consciousness, undefinable, eternal,

ever manifest and omnipresent, shines as the diversity (of the many things of this
world).

tattvatas tu na nānārtharūpā nāpy ekavigrahā |
yāniketā nirātaṅkā khasvabhāvā (yāniketa nirātaṅka khasvabhāvān) namāmi
(namosmi)

tām | 2 |

In reality neither many nor just a single form, signless (aniketa) and free of

fear, I salute that (divine consciousness that is) the Void (kha).

The Root Aphorism
yat pīṭhacakrārcitapañcavāhaprakāśam ānandakhamūrticakram |
aṣṭāṣṭacakraṁ pravirājate tad gurukramaughaś ca catuṣṭayārthaḥ || 3 |I
The current of the Lineage of the Masters (gurukrama), the Four-fold
Reality (catuṣṭhayārtha), manifests as the Wheel of the Sacred Seat (pīthacakra),
worshipped as the Five Currents (pañcavāha), the Wheels of Light, Bliss and the
Form of Emptiness, (which together constitute), the Wheel of Sixty-four Energies.

3)

iti siddhamukhāyātaṁ (-yāta) mūlasūtram idaṁ param |
pīthoditaṁ (-dita) mahāmnāyaṁ (mahāmnāya) saṁpradāyopabṛṁhitam || 4 |I
This is the supreme root aphorism transmitted by the word of mouth of the
Siddhas (the Accomplished Ones). It is the Great Teaching (mahāmnāya) born of
the Sacred Seat (pīṭha) and extended by the tradition.
yat tat sadgurupādābjaprasādāvagataṁ (-pādāvje-) sphuṭam |
dhāmāditritayeneha cakrabhaṅgabhayān manāk || 5 ||
prakāśyate mayā samyag vākyair aviṣamāśayaiḥ |
kudeśikamatenaiva (-mataśvabhra) bhraṁśināṁ bhaktiśālinām || 6 ||
' Only one manuscript of this text has been recovered. See bibliography. Where the text

has been emended, the original reading in the manuscript is noted in brackets after the
emendation.

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR
For fear of betraying the assembly (of initiates, cakra), I will reveal herein

by means of the triad of Abode (Letter and Consciousness), correctly and without
ambiguity, just a little of what I have clearly understood by the grace of the lotus
feet of a true master, for the benefit of those who, (although possessing true)
devotion, have fallen by (following) the teachings of a bad master. (5-6)

mahāmelāpasaṁbhūtayuktijñasya pracodanāt |

ekāyanaujakākhyasya svīkṛtyoddhartum udyamam || ] |I
It is the exertion of the vitalizing one (ojaka) who is the sole path (ekāyana
to liberation) and knows the practice born of the Great Union. Impelled (by him I
have) accepted it to elevate (others).

The Sacred Seat
Śśivaśaktyubhayonmeṣasāmarasyodbhavaṁ mahat |

vīryaṁ tasmād deha eva mahāpīṭhe (-pīṭha) samudgatam (-taḥ) || 8 I|

The vitality (vīrya) which is the energy (mahat) generated from the
oneness (sāmarasya) of the expansion of both Siva and Śakti has arisen within
(my) body, the Great Seat (of divine consciousness).

ādyasaṅṁvitsamullāsaḥ (-sa) pīṭhe pīṭhe (pīyas) kṛtāspadaḥ (-dā) |
anantaśakticakraughasvāminī tatra mokṣadā (mokṣayam) || 9 ||
The mistress of the flux of the Wheel of Endless Power bestows freedom,

in whichever of the sacred seats the primordial outpouring of consciousness takes
place.
pṛthivyādimahābhūtapañcake sā (tad) virājate |

akṛtrimamahāvīryasphurattaikasvarūpiṇī || 10 ||
She shines in all the five great elements from Earth onwards, her one

nature the radiant pulse of the uncreated and immense vitality (vīrya of
consciousness).

yā saṅvit saiva satataṁ pīṭhacakraikadharmiṇĩ |
āsthitāpi satāṁ gamyā niravagrahavigrahā || 1] II

The one nature of consciousness is the Wheel of the Sacred Seat, whose

form is free of limitations. Although persisting at all times, this (consciousness) can

be known only to the wise.

vīreśasya sthitāḥ pañca kalā yāḥ satatoditāḥ |
tā eva sarvavarṇākhyaśaktīnāṁ pīthatāṁ gatāḥ || 12 ||
Perpetually active, the five energies of the Lord of the Heroes have
become the Sacred Seat of all the energies of the letters.

TANTRĀLOKA

asvarānāhatakalā yahnyarkaśaśirūpiṇīḥ |

pīthaśmaśānakṣetreśamelāpayajanātmikāḥ (-kajanā-) || 13 ||

They are the letter A, the energy of Unstruck Sound, Fire, Sun and Moon,
corresponding to the Sacred Seat, the Cremation Ground, the Lord of the Field,
Union and the Sacrifice.

The Lord of the Sacred Seat
viṣargasthitisaṁhãraprathãgrãsaikaghasmaraḥ |

nirupākhyamahādīptisamullāsanatatparaḥ (nirūpākṣa-) || 14 II

yo
‘dhyuṣṭakalanodrekasvabhāvaḥ
(yoṇudhyuṣṭakalodrekasvabhāva)
praṇavābhidhaḥ |
pīthādhipas tam evāhaṁ nāmāmy (nanāsy) āgamasiddhaye || 15 1
I saḻute the Lord of the SŚacred Seat to attain the teaching (āgama), He who

is called (praṇava), the sacred OM, whose inner nature is exalted by virtue of the

activity (kalanā) of (Kunṇḍaliṇī, the energy) in three folds and one half (adhyuṣṭa),
He who greedily consumes the unfolding perception of emission (visarga),
persistence and withdrawal, and who is intent on generating the Great Light of the
Inexplicable. (14-15)

The Cremation Ground
nirvikalpavikalpātmarūpā niḥśeṣasaṁvidaḥ |
yatrāsaṁketadurdarśe (-darśa) svabhāve (svabhāvaḥ) karavīrake || 16 ||
nityoditamahāgrāsacitau (-cittau) yānti layaṁ sadā |
tacchmaśāne (-na) mahāvīraṁ (mahāvīra) hṛdghatanarataṁ (hrṛ(?)t-) namaḥ |l

17 I

I salute the Great Hero who is intent on the throb of the heart of
(consciousness), in that cremation ground, namely, Karavīraka, which is one’s own
(true inner) nature that, without sign or mark, is terrible to behold, where all

perceptions (sarvid), those accompanied by thought and those free of them, are
constantly consumed in the pyre of the Great Destruction (mahāgrāsa) (that burns
there) ever manifest. (16-17)

The Lord of the Field

mahāsaṁhāravisphārabalenotkaṭamūrtimān |

āvaṭatāṅkasaṁketo (avata- -saṅketa) nirāvaraṇadhāmagaḥ || 18 |I
nirniketāsvarollāsasvarūpaḥ satatoditaḥ |
śrīmatpīṭhavare nityaṁ kṣetrapālo jayaty ajaḥ || 19 I|
The Lord of the Field, residing in the venerable and best of sacred seats,

unborn, is ever victorious. Present in the unobscured abode whose sign (sarṁketa)

is the Wine (tāṁka) of the Void (āvaṭa), (he is) the ever-active outpouring of
Unstruck Sound (asvara) from the Void (nirniketa), and the veritable embodiment

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

of martial pride (utkaṭa), by virtue of the force of the engulfing expansion of the
Great Destruction. (18 -19)

The Lineage of the Masters
khecaryādisphuradrūpaḥ śākinyanto gurukramaḥ |
sṛṣṭyādyānākhyaparyantas tathā devīnayaḥ smṛtaḥ || 20 ||
The Lineage of the Masters (gurukrama), radiant (with the energies) that

range from Khecarī to Śākinī, is known as the Teaching of the Goddess (devīnaya),
that extends from Emanation to the Inexplicable.
itthaṁ sthito ‘dvayollāsaḥ (sthitaṁ-) sāmarasyeṇa vartate |
aniśaṁ yatra melāpaḥ (-pe) so ‘niketo jayet (japet) paraḥ || 21 ||

Abiding in this way, the outpouring of nonduality abides as oneness
(sāmarasya), where the union takes place constantly that, free of signs, is supreme
and victorious.
grāhyagrāhakavisphāragrasanaikaparāyaṇaḥ |
paro ʻpi pañcavāhaughaścakrarūpeṇa niṣṭhitaḥ || 22 ||
Although (continuing to be absolute and) supreme, (the one reality), which

is the current of the Five Currents (pañcavāha), well-established as the wheel (of
energies), is solely intent on consuming (grasana) the unfolding expansion of
subject and object.

yatra nirūpanirdhāma vibhātyeko ‘nirodhataḥ ( bhaikhyā anirodhataḥ) ||
sa ko ʻpi rājate nityaṁ mahāyāgamahotsavaḥ || 23 ||
A certain great festival of the Great Sacrifice is where One, devoid of form
and without abode, shines unobstructed.

ittham ādhārarūpo ʻyaṁ (ārādha-) pañcadhā yaḥ sa eva ca |
ekasyaiva svarūpasya kālikākhyasya viṣṭaraḥ || 24 ||
In this way, this five-fold fundamental nature is itself the expansion
(vistara) of the one innate nature (svarūpa) called Kālikā.
The Five Currents
vyomavāmādipañcātmasvarūpasphurito yathā |

guruvaktracidullāsavikāsena (-vikāśena) tathocyate || 25 ||

It is said that the radiant manifestation of the five-fold reality, ranging
from Vyomavāmā onwards, occurs by the unfolding of the outpouring of™
consciousness from the master's mouth.
prathamaspandavisphāradharmiṇī
nirniketanā (nirṇi-) |

TANTRĀLOKA

vyomeśvarī tv anicchātaḥ śabdādhiṣṭhātrirūpiṇī (-tṛrūpiṇī) ||26 ||
Vyomeśvarī, the unfolding of the primordial pulse of consciousness
(prathamaspanda), signless, spontaneously (anicchataḥ) abides as the sustaining
ground of Speech.
khecaryākhyasamārūḍhā ciccamatkāranirbharā |
svarasena tu saiveha rūpasvīkāratatparā || 27 ||
Established in (the phase) called Khecarī and full of the wonder of
consciousness, this same (goddess) is here spontaneously (svarasena) intent on
assimilating Form.
nānāviṣayasaṁrambhapãātinī bhũcarī smṛtā |
pratyāvṛttitayā nityaṁ viśvagrāsaikaghasmarī|| 28 II
Descending to the level of the activity of the many objects of sense, she is
known as Bhūcarī who, alone, as the process of reversal (back into consciousness),
constantly devours all things.
saṁhãrabhakṣiṇī (-bhakṣyaṇī) saiva rasasaṁcarvaṇotthitā |
svarūpaprāntacitvattaḥ samārūḍhā nirāśrayā (-yāḥ) || 29 ||
This same (goddess) is Saṁhārabhakṣiṇī — the Devourer of Withdrawal —

arisen to relish the juice of the aesthetic delight (of objectivity inwardly digested).

Endowed with the innermost consciousness of one’s own nature, she is well
mounted (on universal consciousness) and free (of all outer) support.
saiva raudreśvarī jñeyā surabhigrahaṇodyatā |
One should know this same (goddess) to be Raudreśvarī, intent on laying
hold of the fragrance (of the latent traces of objectivity). (30ab)
itthaṁ devīnaye (-name) samyag vyomavāmādipañcakam || 30 |l
daṇḍamuṇḍakrameṇoktaṁ mahānirvāṇasiddhidam |
Thus, the pentad consisting of Vyomavāmā and the others has been
properly explained in the Devīnaya (the Teaching Concerning the Goddess) in
terms of the sequence of the Stick and the Head, that bestows the accomplishment
of the Great Extinction (mahānirvāṇa). (30cd-31ab)

grāhyagrāhakabhedotthakalpanākṣobhasaṁkhyayā (-bhedotthaṁ-) || 31 |I
sāmarasyamahāhlādadhāmny (-dhāmnetā) etā bhānti devatāḥ |

These two are the twelve rays of the organs of action along with the vital breath

(prāṇa), and those of knowledge along with the intellect, respectively.

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

These deities shine within the abode of the great bliss of oneness
(sāmarasya) by contemplating (saṁkhyā) the disturbance of thought arising from
the division of subject and object. (31cd-32ab)

avarṇapañcapiṇḍārṇarūpayor advayṝī gatiḥ || 32 ||

yatas tasmād ucyate ‘laṁ devīnāṁ (devīnā) saṁsthitaḥ (tasthitaṁ) vapuḥ |
yo ʻnāhatahatottīrṇarāvarūpo ‘svaraḥ (-rūpaḥ svaraḥ) smṛtaḥ |l| 33 1I
suvarṇamūladhāmotthavyomapañcaniketabhṛt (-vyomatpañna-(?)) |
tadgatāḥ parameśvaryo vyomavāmādisaṁjñikāḥ l| 34 ||
The letter A and the five letters syllable (i.e., KHPHREM) are one, and so
there is no more to say. The body of the goddesses abides (in this way). The letter
A (asvara) is said to be the resonance (rāva of consciousness) beyond both struck
and unstruck sound. It is the meeting ground of the Five Voids, arisen from the
abode of the Golden Root (suvarṇamūla). The goddesses who reside there are
those named Vyomavāmā and the rest. (32cd-34)

viṣayagrāso (-grāsa) vyākhyatas (vyākyatada-) tadanyavyomamadhyagaḥ (-

makārādiṣvarūpo yaḥ pañcapiṇḍakramoditaḥ || 35 ||
tatraiva vyomavāmādidevyaḥ samyag vyavasthitāḥ |
akramodrekavibhavāḥ paramādvayavigrahāḥ || 36 ||
That is said to be the devouring of the objects of sense that takes place in
the centre of the other (??) Void. It is the letter M and the rest, that has arisen from
the sequence of the five-fold syllable (KHPHREM). The goddess Vyomavāmā and
the rest are properly established there itself, their glorious power bor of the
intensity of the changeless (akrama aspect of consciousness) and from supreme
nonduality. (35-36)

itthaṁ devyo nirāveśamahāvarṇakramoditāḥ |
tattvataḥ sparśasaṁvittilaharyām antare sphuṭam || 37 1|
sāmarasyena bhāntīha vāmādyā devatāḥ sadā |
In this way, the goddesses generated through the sequence of (A.,) the
Great Letter (that, transcendent, is) free of penetration, are in reality clearly
manifest within the wave of the consciousness of touch. The goddesses Vāmā and
the rest shine here eternally as oneness (sāmarasyena). (37-38ab)

The Five Goddesses
tāsām eveha vakṣyāmi devīnām api viṣṭarāt || 38 I|
pañcānām api bhāgena saṁdeśikadṛśāgatam ḷ
I shall now explain at length (each) of these five Goddesses, part by part,

according to the teaching that has come from the masters. (38cd-39ab)

mahāśūnyātiśūnyatvāt (mahāśrunyātiśruṇya-) samyakśāntatarāpi (samyakṛ-) yā

I|39 1|

TANTRĀLOKA

sarvavyomāni vāmantī (vamati) vyomavāmeśvarī tu sā |
mahāsaṁhāragagane vāmā teṣāṃm athoditā || 40 ||
divyaugham udgirantītthaṁ tāṁ stuve sparśavigrahām |
Vyomavāmeśvaṁī is the Void beyond the Great Void, and so is correctly
and most perfectly at rest, but even so she emanates (vāmantī) all the voids. She is

their emanation (vāmā), arisen in the Void of the Great Destruction. I praise Her

who thus emits the Divine Current (divyaugha) and whose form is touch
(sparśavigraha). (39cd-41ab)

tasyām anicchayodeti śaśvattaddharmadharmiṇī|| 41 I||
yālakṣyaspandalaharī tām ahaṁ khecarīṁ stuve |
svātantryeṇa sadā saiva carantī sve pare ‘mbare || 42 ||
prathamaspandam āśritya rājate cic ca khecarī|
I praise Khecarī, who spontaneously arises within (Vāmeśvarī) who, ever

endowed with that (same) nature, is the wave of the inscrutable pulse (spanda) of
consciousness. She moves freely at all times in her own Supreme Sky (of
consciousness), established in the primordial pulse of consciousness
(prathamaspanda). Khecaṁī, Who is (pure) consciousness, shines radiantly.

(41cd-43ab)

saivākramaviṣargākhyā (-khya) bhūmau yā carati sphuṭam || 43 |
tasmād bhūcariśabdākhyā tām eva praṇamāmy aham |
The same (goddess,) called the Emission Without Process
(akramaviṣarga) moves, clearly apparent, on the plane (bhāmi of sense objects,)
and so she is called Bhūcarī. To her I bow. (43cd-44ab)
saiva tattvasphurattātmavapuḥ (-sphuratā-) saṁharati kṣaṇāt || 44 ||
svatantrā
(svamantraḥ)
svapadānte

vande

(saṁ(?)rabhakṣaṇīṁ ) |
Again, this same (goddess), her body the pulsing radiance of (the One)
Reality, withdraws (all things) in a moment. 1 praise Saṁhārabhakṣiṇī (the
Devourer of Withdrawal), She who, free, is within her own abode (svapada).

(44cd-45ab)

pratyāvṛttitayā nityaṁ svarūpatrayabhakṣiṇī || 45 ||
mahāvyomāṇtaniṣṭhātvāt saiva raudreśvarī smṛtā |

Established within the Great Void, she perpetually devours the three innate

natures (of creation, persistence and destruction), as (she) is the process of reversal

(back from manifestation into unmanifest consciousness), and so this same

(goddess) is known as Raudreśvarī. (45cd-46ab)

āsāṁ madhye (madhyāṁ) tu devīnāṁ pādukā (yadikā) sphurati svataḥ || 46 |I
sarvās tatraiva (tadaiva) satataṁ sāmarasyena yānty alam |

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

The Master's Sandals (pādukā) shine by themselves in the midst of these
goddesses, and there itself they all perpetually attain oneness (sāmarasya). (46cd-

47ab)

iti sadguruvaktrotthayuktyā yo hy anirodhitaḥ (yenātiraudhitaḥ) || 47 II
samādhisevitaḥ śaśvat sa mahāmnāyapāragaḥ |
He who, by this practice that has come from the lips of a true master,

possesses perfect concentration (samācdhi) at all times and is not obstructed, has

understood the Great Tradition. (47cd-48ab)

kramākramobhayottīrṇadṛśeha prakaṭīkṛtam || 48 II
vaktrād vaktre (vaktra) samāyātaṁ pañcavāham anargalam |
ittham ekaiva pañcātmarūpeṇa sphurati svataḥ || 49 |I
svabhāvaṁ prakaṭīkartuṁ yā devī tām ahaṁ śraye |
The unconditioned Five Currents, transmitted from mouth to mouth, has

here been clearly elucidated by the teaching beyond both the sequence (of
perception) and its absence. lIn this way, the one (goddess) shines spontaneously as
the five-fold nature. I take refuge in that goddess to make my own true nature
manifest. (48cd-50ab)
The Wheel of Light (Prakāśacakra)
nirṇiketatayā samyak cakraṁ (cakra) visphāritaṁ (visphātritaṁ) mahat || 50 |I
vyomeśvaryāvibhedena khecaryākhyaṁ sadoditam |
The great Wheel called Khecarī, ever active, is made to unfold (by the
Void, which is) free of (phenomenal) signs, at one (avibhedena) with Vāmeśvarī.

(50cd-51ab)

dviṣaṭkadhāmavapuṣā devībhir nityam āśritaḥ (-rā) || 51 |I
svakhakalākalāpotthavibhavo (kheḥkalā-) vigatagrahaḥ |
The glorious power that, free of limitations, arises from the aggregate of
energies of its own inherent emptiness (svakhakalā), and is always linked with the
goddesses by the body, which is the abode of the two groups of six (senses).

(51cd-52ab)

tathā cāvyaktarūpā ye nirvibhāgaikavigrahāḥ || 52 ||
svarā dvādaśasaṁkhyākāḥ paśyantīgarbhaniṣṭhitāḥ |
paraprakāśavibhavasvabhāvatvād gurūttamāḥ |l| 53 II

Such also are the twelve yvowels, whose nature is unmanifest, and their one

form undivided. They are the glorious power of the supreme light of

These are the five senses and mind (manas) and the five organs of action and the
intellect (buddhī).

TANTRĀLOKA

consciousness, and s0, established in the womb of Word of Vision (pasyantī), they
are the most excellent teachers. (52cd-53)
tā (tān) eva prathayantīha (katha-) dikcarīcakravartinaḥ |

nirāvaraṇacidvyomarūpā dvādaśadhāvyayāḥ || 54 ||
saṁvidullāsanārūḍhāḥ (saṁviduktāsanā-) svaprakāśaikavigrahāḥ |
yā (yāh(?)mā) haṁsahaṁsamatyādi ( haṁsamatyādi) nāmataḥ satatoditāḥ ||

55 ll

Residing in the Wheel of Dikcarī, they unfold here (in this world). Their

nature is the unobscured Void of Consciousness and, twelve-fold, they are eternal.

Mounted on the outpouring of consciousness, their one form is their own inherent

Light and, ever active, are called Unstruck Sound (haṁsa), its possessor

(haṁsamati) and the like. (54-55)

tā eveha samākhyatāḥ khecaryādhiṣṭhitāḥ sadā |
dikcarīcakrarūpiṇyo niyatāgrahavarjitāḥ || 56 II
jayanty akramasadbhāvadarśayantyo nirāvilāḥ |
itthaṁ prakãāśacakrasya saṁsthitiḥ suṣṭhitā parā l| 57 |I
nirviṭarkanirābhāsasvarūpā satatoditā |
Perpetually sustained by Khecarī, pure and free of limitations, they are
said to be the (energies) of the Wheel of Dikcarī. Revealing the essence of the
changeless (akrama) (aspect of reality), they are victorious. Such is the abiding
state, well established and supreme, unmanifest, beyond reason and ever active, of
the Wheel of Light. (56-58ab)

The Wheel of Bliss (Ānandacakra)
indoḥ ṣoḍaśasaṁkhyākāḥ kalā amṛtavigrahāḥ || 58 II
yās tā eva samāśritya koṅkaṇāmbādināmataḥ |

prodito (-tā) raśmivibhavaḥ svasvarūpaikagocaraḥ (-rūpika-) || 59 ||

icchāvikṣobhaparyante rājate nirniketanaḥ (nirṇīketanaḥ) |

The energies of the Moon are sixteen and their form nectar. Once having
taken their place as (the goddesses) called Koṅīkaṇāmbā and the rest, they are fully
active. Arisen, the glorious power (of their) rays, its one field their own essential
nature, shines Void (nirniketana) at the climax of the arousal of desire. (58cd-60ab)

āsphālya madhyam ārūḍhās tābhir eva samāśritāḥ |

dvipañcakendriyadvāraiḥ paravyomaikavigrahāḥ || 61 II

bahirvinirgatā devyo haṭhamelāpakena yāḥ |

The sixteen vowels, their qualities unmanifest, are tranquil. The goddesses,
whose sole form is the Supreme Sky of Consciousness, having embraced them and
risen up to the centre, are penetrated by them and, by (the power of) violent union,
exit by the ten doors of the senses. (60cd-62ab)

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

tābhir eva samāśritya samyag rūpādipañcakam || 62 I|

nirvikalpaciduddāmabhairavasyāmitadyuteḥ |

ānandavapuṣo rūpam arcyate nirvibhāgataḥ || 63 ||
The group of five, form and the rest, is the (outer) form of the body of

bliss, which is the unbounded radiance of Bhairava, who is unrestrained (uddāma),

non-discursive consciousness. Rightly penetrated by these (energies), (this group

of five) is worshipped in an undivided way. (62cd-63)

itthaṁ dviraṣṭavisṣphāravibhavaḥ kalpanojjhitaḥ |
niruttaracamatkārapradatvāt (-camatkāraṁ-) prathito ‘niśam || 64 ||
In this way, the glorious power of the sixteen-fold expansion, free of
thought constructs, is ever perceived, bestowing as it does unexcelled wonder
(niruttaracamatkāra).
ānandacakramahimā bhūcaryā sphāritā (sphāritaḥ) sadā |
yatas tasmāt tu nirdiṣṭā [nirdiṣṭo] bhūcarīcakranāmataḥ || 65 |I
tam eva praṇamāmīha jñaptigarbhāntaroditam |
The glory of the Wheel of Bliss is unfolded constantly by Bhūcarī, and so
is named the Wheel of Bhūcarī. I bow to that (wheel, manifest) here (in this world)
within the womb of cognitive consciousness (jñapti). (65-66ab)
The Wheel of Form (Mūrticakra)
vahnũr (vahni-) dvipañcavisphārarūpo nityavikasvaraḥ || 66 ll
kharandhravyomamārgeṇa (ka-) śikhāsaptakasaṁyutaḥ |

aśaktatīkṣṇadharmo ʻsau (-dharmāsau) lelihāno nirantaraḥ || 67 ||

prodito viśvasaṁrambhagrasanāya nirāvilaḥ |
evaṁ saptadaśākhyaṁ tu mūrticakraṁ (-cakra) nirāśrayam || 68 II
niṣṭaraṅgamahāvyomadhāmasthaṁ bhāti niṭyaśaḥ |

Fire, consisting of the ten-fold expansion and possessing seven flames,
perpetually extends by (means of suṣumnā, which is) the Path of the Void of the
Cavity of Emptiness. Piercingly sharp, it constantly licks up (the universe). Pure, it

has arisen to devour the ongoing activity of all things. Such is the Wheel of Form

(mūrticakra), free of (outer) support, called the (Wheel of) Seventeen. Established

in the abode of the Great Void, free of the waves (of manifestation), it shines

perpetually. (66cd-69ab)

praśāntarūpavibhavāḥ ṣvarāḥ ṣoḍaśasaṁjñikāḥ || 69 ||

visargasahitā bhānti parāvāggarbhaniṣṭhitāḥ (-vāgarbha-) |

The sixteen vowels, their energies completely tranquil, shine along with
(the energy of) emission (visarga), firmly fixed in the womb of Supreme Speech.

(69cd-70ab)

varṇabhedakrameṇetthaṁ samāśrityeha tān adhaḥ || 70 ||

TANTRĀLOKA

bhāti śaśvaccakravaraṁ (śasvañ-) mūrtyākhyaṁ (-khya) vigatagraham |
Once it penetrates them thus here below, by means of the sequence of the
various letters, the etemnal and most excellent Wheel called Form shines, free of
limitations. (7Ocd-71ab)

ānandacakratanavo raśmayo ye nirantarāḥ || 71 ||
asmābhiḥ (-bhīḥ) kathitāḥ pūrvaṁ gurucakrakramoḍditāḥ |
tā eva ṣoḍaśākārāḥ saṁvidullāsavigrahāḥ || 72 ||
yugapad yānti (yanti) yatrāśu (-su) sāmarasyaṁ viyatpade (vipat-) |

niṣṭaraṅge (nistaraṅgo) nirābhāse pare saptadaśābhidhe || 73 ||

The rays we mentioned previously, that have as their body the Wheel of
Bliss, (emitted) continuously, arise from the sequence of the Circle of the Masters.
Those (energies) of sixteen forms, the outpourings of consciousness,
simultaneously attain a state of oneness (sāmarasya) in an instant within the abode
of emptiness (viyatpada) which, free of the waves (of sensory activity and
thought), is unmanifest, supreme, and known as the (Wheel of) Seventeen. (71cd-

73)

itthaṁ visphārayantīdaṁ yoginīcakram (yogini-) uttamam |
saṁhãrabhakṣiṇĩ devī bhāti saptadaśātmataḥ || 74 ||
tad eva vande satataṁ vimalaṁ sarvadoditam |
Unfolding in this way, this, the most excellent Circle of Yoginīs, the
Goddess Saṁhārabhakṣiṇī manifests as the seventeen (energies). I constantly
praise that (Circle of Yoginis), which is pure and perpetually active. (74-75ab)
dhyānādikalanātītarūpatvād akulātmikām || 75 |I
ambaraughavikāsaikadharmiṇīṁ (aṁvarāgha- -ṇī) maṅgalāṁ [-lā) śraye |
I take refuge in the goddess Maṅgalā, who is the expansion of the current

of the Void that, transcending all the differentiated forms (kalanā) of meditation
and the rest, is thus Akula (the undifferentiated transcendent). (75cd-76ab)

māyāto gālayaty āśu (-āsu) maṅgaleha tataḥ smṛtā l| 76 ||
vīrapañcānanārūḍhā mahāmelāpatatparā |
She is called Maṅgalā here (in this world), because she quickly frees

(gālayati) from Māyā. Mounted on the Hero's Five Faces, she is intent on the
Great Union (mahāmelāpa). (76cd-77ab)

paraviddharasaughena (paravidha-) madanaṁ (madanāṁ) cetasi bhṛśam

(niśaṁ) || 77 II

gamanāt paramākāśe sṛṣṭyādikalanojjhite |
sānākhyācakravapuṣaḥ (lānākhe-) paratattvasya sarvadā |/ 78 II
maṅgaleha tataḥ khyātā nirāvaraṇadharmiṇī |

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

(Again, she is called Maṅgalā because) her mind is intensely inebriated
(madana) with the flow of the juice of the aesthetic delight (rasa) that is penetrated
by supreme (consciousness) by moving (gamanāt) in the Supreme Void, free of the
differentiated manifestation (kalanā) of creation and the rest. She is ever (the
goddess) of the Supreme Principle, whose form is the Wheel of the Inexplicable.
So She is called Maṅgalā here (in the world), and Her nature is free of obscuration.

(77cd-79ab)

asyāḥ svarūparūpo yaḥ khakārādivivarjitaḥ || 79 ||
pañcapiṇḍamayo mantro vāktrayojjhitavigrahaḥ |
avarṇasvararūpaś ca vyomeśībhiḥ prapiṇḍitaḥ || 80 ||
pañcabhiḥ sāmarasyena vācako nāma yaḥ sthitaḥ |
Her own most intimate nature (svasvarūpa) is (Śiva,) the one who speaks
(vācaka). He is the five-lettered syllable mantra (i.e., KHPHREṀ), (although,)

devoid of the letter KH and the rest, and His form is free of the three levels of
Speech. He is also the letter A, gathered together (prapiṇḍita) by the five
Vyomesis, (and is) at one with them. (79cd-81ab)
ṣoḍaśādhārasaṁsthānasaṁsthitā (-saṁsthi ) yā citiḥ sadā || 81 II
sphurantī svabalodrekāniyatagrahamuḍdritā (ṣsvavalādrekā-) |

The power of consciousness (citi) that abides constantly within the abode

of the sixteen supports pulses radiantly, and by the intensity of Her innate power is
stamped with the seal (mudrā) of unconditioned perception. (81cd-82b)
tasyā vigatya (vigātya) yugapad vibhedollāsavigraham || 82 |I

nirniketamahājñānaraśmayaḥ (nirṇiketa-) khe (sva) sadoditāḥ |

sāmarasyamayaṁ cakraṁ darśayanty avibhedataḥ || 83 ||

Having eliminated all at once its (outer) form, which is the outpouring of

duality, the rays of the Great Abodeless (nirniketa) Consciousness, ever manifest in
the Void (of transcendence), reveal the Wheel, which is oneness (sāmarasya), as

undivided. (82cd-83)

bhāvābhāvapadottīrṇaviyadvāmapade sthitā |
antarbahīrūpatayā ye tiṣṭhantīndriyātmakāḥ || 84 ||
karās (kanās-) tān eva sahasā tathā svadehaviṣṭaram (kaṇṭha-) |

nayati svabalonmeṣād (-ṣā) nirniketacidambaram (nirṇiketa-) || 85 ||

Established on the emanating plane (vāmapada) of emptiness beyond the
plane of being and nonbeing, (the power of consciousness) leads with sudden force
(sahasā), by the expansion of its inherent power, those rays (of cognitive energy)
that abide inwardly and externally as the senses, along with the expanse of (its)
body, to the abodeless Sky of Consciousness. (84-85)

TANTRĀLOKA

The Wheel of the Aggregate
The Jñānasiddhas
yā saiva kathitā sadbhiḥ parā mudrā karaṅkiṇī |

mudrayitvā pṛthagbhedaṁ mudreyaṁ karaṇojjhitā (-tām) |
(The energy that does this) is called Karaṅkiṇī, the supreme seal (mmudrā),

by the wise. It is the energy of these, the Jñānasiddhas. This gesture, having sealed
duality, is free of all the senses. (86-87ab)

The Mantrasiddhas
prthivyādiprakṛtyantatattvaviṣṭāravibhramaḥ || 87 ||
dviṣaṭkadviguṇātmā yaḥ pārimityagrahānvitaḥ (-tā) |
tam eva nigalanty (nigalaty) uccaiḥ krodhān mantramarīcayaḥ || 88 II
(+ yatas tasyān) mantrasiddhā yatas tasyā ( ) vyvomadhāmakramoditāḥ |
The rays of the Mantra(siddhas) upwardly consume (nigalanti) by (the
force of) Wrath the entire expanse of the play of the twenty-four conditioned
principles from Earth to Nature, as they are the Mantrasiddhas of that (power of
consciousness) generated from the process (operating in) the Abode of Emptiness
(vyomadhāmakrama). (87cd-89ab)

krodhena tattvavibhavaṁ nayaty ugranirākulā (-kulaṁ) || 89 ||

yā māntraṁ (mātraṁ) paramaṁ vīryaṁ sā mudrā krodhinī smṛtā |
The seal (mudrā) that is fierce and (yet) undisturbed, that conducts the

energy (vibhava) of the principles to the supreme vitality of mantra by (the power

of) Wrath is said to be Krodhinī. This most excellent seal is that of the

Mantrasiddhas. Once having sealed what is generated by duality, it is established in

the body. (89cd-90ab)
The Melapasiddhas

eṣāṁ (āsāṁ) mantrākhyarūpāṇāṁ siddhānāṁ saṁvyavasthitā || 90 ||
mudrayitvā vibhedotthaṁ dehe (dehaṁ) mudreyam uttamā |
dviṣaṭkarūpabhedena granthayo ye vyavasthitāḥ || 91 II
tān eva bhedayitvemāḥ śaktayaḥ proditāḥ parāḥ |
mahāmeḻlāpadharmiṇyaḥ
sāmarasyaikavigrahāḥ
krauṇḍalyummeṣavigrahāḥ) || 92 ||
nirāvaraṇacidyyomadhāmasthā bhānti nityaśaḥ |

(MM:

Once the twelve knots have been pierced, these energies arise supreme.

Endowed with the qualities of the Great Union, their one form oneness
(sāmaraṣya), they, established in the abode of the unobscured expanse of
consciousness, shine perpetually. (90cd-93ab)

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

.svabalodrekasamutthaṁ

.(-kasvamukhaṁ)

bhedaḍambaram

dambaram) || 93 II
yā sthitā pūrṇavibhavā nirāvaraṇavigrahā (nirāvarṇa-) |
bhairavī saiva vikhyãtā mudrā sadasadujjhitā || 94 |
niṣṭaraṅgavikāsātmasāmarasyaikanirbharā (-vikāśātma-) |
eṣāṁ (āsāṁ) melāpasiddhānāṁ mudreyaṁ bhairavyātmikā (bhairavā-) || 95 ||

(-

Bhairavī is said to be the seal that, having filled the spectacle of duality
generated by the intensity of her innate power, is free of being and nonbeing, her

glorious power full (and perfect) and form unobscured. Bhairavī by nature, this is

the gesture, full to overflowing with the oneness (sāmarasya), which is the
waveless expansion of consciousness, of these Melāpasiddhas. (93cd-95).

The Śāktasiddhas
puryaṣṭakasya gaditā vāsanābījavigrahāḥ |
śaktayo yāḥ sūkṣmatarās tāsāṁ saṁharaṇodyatāḥ || 96 ||
dīptayo yās tīkṣṇatamā vigatagrahadhāmagāḥ |
tā eva kathitāḥ samyak śāktasiddhā nirāmayāḥ || 97 ||
The Śāktasiddhas, free of defects, are rightly said to be (those who) reside

in the abode devoid of limitations (graha) they, luminous and supremely powerful
(tīkṣṇatama), are intent on destroying the most subtle energies said to be (those)

who form are the seeds of the latent traces of the subtle body (puryasṭaka). (96-97)
sarvasaṁhārasaṁhãrarũpã vr̥ttir nirargalã |
yā saiva kathitā mudrā lelihānātighasmarā || 98 II

The seal said to be Lelihānā, extremely voracious and free of all restraint,

is the activity (of consciousness) which is the destruction of all destruction.

mudrayitvā dvidhābhāvaṁ mudreyaṁ paradhāmagā || 99 ||

This seal, ever active, is present within the Supreme Abode, having
sealed the duality of these, the goddesses of the Śāktasiddhas.

The Śāmbhavasiddhas
parādivaikharītyantaṁ (parānvaikharīnityaṁ) vāgullekhacatuṣṭayam |
yatas tasyaiva niratā (niranta) bhedagrāsāya (-ye) dīptayaḥ || 100 ||
sāmarasyapadaprāptidāyinyo yā vikasvarāḥ |
khyātās tā eva śāmbhavyo devyo nirdvayadhāmagāḥ || 101 I
The goddesses of the Śāmbhava(siddhas) reside in the abode free of
duality and bestow the attainment of the plane of oneness (sāmarasya). They are
said to be these very (goddesses) because, expanding, luminous lights, they are

TANTRĀLOKA

intent on devouring (the duality of) the four-fold manifestation of Speech, that
ranges from the Supreme to the Corporeal (vaikharī). (100-101)
yāsparśāsparśagagane carantī nirniketanā |

sarvāvaraṇanirmuktā mudrā sā khecarī smṛtā || 102 ||

The seal that, free of all obscuring coverings and without abode
(nirniketanā), moves in the Expanse of No Touch (asparśagagana) and is (herself)

Touch (sparśā), is said to be Khecarī.

taḍillēkhaiva (-kheva) yā vyomni yāntī sarvojjhite pade (game) |

svaprakāśavikāsaikarūpā sā khecarī smṛtā || 103 I|

Khecarī is said to be the lightning flash that travels through the Sky (of
Consciousness), the plane free of all things, her sole nature the expansion of her
own innate light (svaprakāśa).

mudraṇāyāśu nānātvaṁ (-tve) mudreyaṁ kalpanojjhitā || 104 |I
This seal, free of thought constructs and perceived (prathitā) at all times,
serves to seal in an instant the multiplicity of these, the goddesses of the
Sāmbhavasiddhas.
yathā hy ānāsmitācakre mudrāpañcasvarūpiṇī |

tathaiva pañca devyas tu (devī tu) vartante [vartinī] satatoditāḥ (-tā) || 105 1I

The five goddesses, ever active, abide thus, as does (the one energy which
is) the five seals, in the Wheel of the absence of Egoity (anāsmitācakra).
cakrapañcasamāyuktā (- ) saṁsthitāpi ( sthitāpi) samantataḥ |
vijñeyā guruvaktrotthayuktyā sadbhir avigrahā (cagrahā) || 106 ||
Formless, everywhere established, and endowed with the five wheels, (her
true nature) should be known by the wise through the practice (yukti) that comes
from the mouth of the master.

The Sequence of Letters

vācyās (vyaktās) tā jñānasiddhākhyāḥ (-khya) vijñeyāḥ

(paratādajāḥ) || 107 |I

paradhāmajāḥ

The sixteen vowels beginning with A and ending with visarga are the
objects of denotation (vācya) — which should be known to be the Jñānasiddhas
born from the supreme abode.

kakārādibhakārāntā varṇavyañjanarūpiṇaḥ |

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

dviṣatkadviguṇākrāntāḥ (-ṇākrāmūḥ (?)) siddhā (siddha) vācakavigrahāḥ (

kavigrahāḥ) || 108 II

The Mantrasiddhas are the consonants (varṇavyañjana) ranging from K
to BH. They possess twenty-four qualities and are the denotators (vācaka).
dvādaśākhyās tathā (-tayāḥ) proktā mātrās tā eva saṁsmṛtāḥ |
melāpasiddhāḥ (-siddhā) satataṁ sāmarasyapradāḥ sadā l| 109 |l
Similarly, the Melāpasiddhas who bestow oneness (sāmarasya) at all
times are considered to be the twelve measures (of the letter A).
yakārādihakārāntāḥ (-rāntā) aṣṭau varṇā vyavasthitāḥ |
Śśāktasiddhās tu te jīñeyā jagaduddyotanodyatāḥ (jagadudyota-) |/ 110 ||

The eight letters ranging from Y to H should be known to be the

Śāktasiddhas, intent on illumining the universe.

akārasyeha yāḥ proktāś catasraḥ (catastraḥ) śaktayo ‘mitāḥ |
śāmbhavākhyāḥ siddhavarāḥ saṁsmr̥tās tāḥ sadoditāḥ (satoditāḥ) || I1 II

The four boundless energies of the letter A are said to be the excellent

Siddhas, ever active, called Śāmbhava.

ittham ādyakṣarasyeha catuḥṣaṣṭis tu raśmayaḥ |
nijadehād ullasitāḥ samāś ceśvarigarbhagāḥ (samañceśvari-) || 1 I2 II

In this way the sixty-four rays of A, the first letter, are generated here from

one’s own body, and (all) abide equally in the womb of the goddess.

tathā ca saṁstutã ( tā) devyaḥ kathaṁ kasmād iti sphuṭam |
procyate ‘tra (mocyate ‘tra) mayā samyaṅ mukhāmnāyadaśābhidaḥ (makhā-) l|

1131I|

Here 1 will explain clearly according to the oral tradition how (these)
goddesses, thus praised, are and from whence (they arise).
sphuṭā ye jñānasiddhākhyā (sphu dākhyā) raudrīśṛṅgāṭtakākṛte (cau
k takākṛte) |
There is an interesting play of words here. The twenty-four consonants represent the

twenty-four principles from Earth to Nature. They are the principles that make manifest

(vyañjana) the inner energies represented by the sixteen vowels. Thus, like the consonants

(vyañjana), that ‘make manifest’ the ‘colour or ‘type’ (varṇa) of the vowels. The 24

principles consist of the five gross elements, their five corresponding sensations, the five

organs of sense and five of action, the inner mental organ consisting of mind, intellect and
ego, and Nature, which is the immediate source and ‘substance’ of all of them. These

principles serve as the channels through which the energies of consciousness operate, and
so are made manifest, just as the consonants manifest the vowels.

TANTRĀLOKA

kalpanāśaktayo (kalpayā-) dīptāḥ parabodhopabṛṁhitāḥ || 114 ||
Those called Jñānasiddhas are clearly manifest within the form of Raudrī’s
triangle. They are the energies of thought, illuminated and intensified by supreme
consciousness. (1 14)
mandraṣiddhāstu ( ṣṭu) vāmāyāḥ sakāśāduditāḥ parāḥ |
śaktayo rāvabimbāśca (-viṁvā ca) sudīptā amitāḥ (yitāḥ sadā) ||

115 II

While the Mantrasiddhas, supreme, arise from Vāmā. These energies, well
illumined and always unlimited, are the very form of the resonance (of
consciousness — rāvabimba).

melāpasiddhāḥ satataṁ prathitā niravagrahāḥ |
ambikāyāḥ parānandanirbharāḥ (-nirbharā) śaktayo ‘mitāḥ || 116 ||
The Melāpasiddhas, perpetually perceived, free of limitations and full of
supreme bliss, are the unlimited energies of Ambikā.
devyaḥ (devyaṁ) saṁsphuritā nityaṁ jyeṣṭhāyāḥ satatotthitāḥ |
śāktasiddhā mahattejobalenotkaṭavigrahāḥ || 1 17 II
spandākhyā nādacidvattā (-cidvyakta) varṇā nityavikasvarāḥ |
The Śāktasiddhas are the goddesses of Jyeṣṭhā. Ever active and perpetually

manifest, their form is immensely powerful (utkaṭa), by virtue of the force of the

vast radiant power (tejas) (of consciousness). They are the letters, perpetually
expanding, that, endowed with consciousness and the resonance (nāda of its
awareness), are called the vibration (of consciousness — spanda). (117-118ab)
kalāś catasraḥ paramāḥ khyātāḥ svātmaprakāśikāḥ || 118 II
kalācatuṣṭayam (-caṭuṣṭam) idaṁ sāmarasyasvarūpatām |

yātaṁ yatrādyavarṇe ʻsmin tadrūpāḥ śāmbhavāḥ smṛtāḥ || 119 ||
There are four energies that, illuminating their own (true) nature, are

said to be supreme. This group of four energies becomes one in A, the first
letter, and the Śāmbhava (Siddhas) (residing) in this (the letter A) are considered
to be of their nature. (118cd-119)

ittham ekasya yugapat sarvadehoḍditās tviṣaḥ |
sarvakalpanakalanānivahavibhramavarjitāḥ || 120 ||
makārarūpam āśritya bhāty anugrahatatparā |
maṅgalākhyā mahālakṣamī vṛṇdacakraikanāyikā || 121 ||
Simultaneously deposited in this way, all the radiant energies that arise
from the body of the one (reality), free of the delusion of all the multitude of
thought processes, into the true nature of the letter M, Mahālakṣmī, who is called

Maṅgalā, the sole mistress of the Wheel of the Aggregate (vrndacakra), shines,
intent on grace. (120-121)

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

varṇabhedakrameṇetthaṁ yadyapi prathitāḥ sphuṭam |
tathāpy avarṇamāhātmyaṁ (-māhātayaṁ) na tyajanti kadācana || 122 ||
But even if (these energies) are clearly perceived (individually) in this way
by means of the sequence of the various types of letters (varṇabheda), they never
forsake the great glory (māhātmya) of the letter A.
ekā devīti vā bhāti tisro dvādaśadhoditā |
udyogādikrameṇoccair ekaikā pañcadhotthitā || 123 |I

Or (from another point of view, one could say that only) one goddess, the

third (of the five), manifests and arises twelve times over (as aspects of her own

energy), each of which arises five-fold through the process (of manifestation) that
commences with exertion (udyoga).
tṛtīyenādyakāreṇa (tṛtīyena prakāreṇa) vṛndacakrakramodayaḥ |
ādyanāthoktabhāṣāyāṁ (-bhaṁgyāyāṁ) laghūktyā prakaṭīkṛtaḥ || 124 ||

From a third (point of view, one can say that) the arising of the sequence
of the Wheel of the Aggregate is engendered by A, the first letter, as explained
concisely in the commentary (bhāṣā) uttered by Ādyanātha.
The Ascent of Consciousness
jhaṭityunmiṣitākhyasya grāhyā (grāhyai) samadṛgātmanaḥ |
yehodeti prathā (prathāt) saiva mahājñānaikarūpiṇī|/ 125 ||
The perception that should be grasped (grāhyā) arises here (in common
daily experience — prathā) at one with the Great Knowledge of (universal
consciousness mahājñāna), and is that of the equal (undifferentiated) perception of
all things, called the (spontaneous and) sudden expansion (of consciousness).
tasyāḥ padārthasaṁrambhaparijñānasvarūpataḥ |
yā vibhāti citiḥ (citi) saiva mahāmantrasvarūpiṇī|/ 126 ||
The power of consciousness (citi) of that (perception), that shines (as all

things), is the complete knowledge of the activity of all that exists (padārtha), and
as such is the Great Mantra.

grāhyagrāhakasaṁśleṣād (grahyagrahaka-)analpāhlādanirbharā |

yā saṁvid rājate saiva mahāmelāpavigrahaḥ || 127 ||

The consciousness that shines, full of the great bliss (āhlāda) that comes
from the contact between subject and object, is the form of the Great Union.

Perhaps the third goddess who governs the Melāpasiddhas is meant here. There she
appears as the twelve energies (mātrā — ‘measures’) of the letter A.

Sense and edition uncertain.

TANTRĀLOKA

nirvikalpacitau (-cito) yatra jñaptimātre (jñāpti-) sadodite |
sāmarasyadṛśā sarvaṁ sthitaṁ śāktaḥ kramas tu saḥ | 128 II
The Sequence of Power (śāktakrama) is where everything abides by virtue
of the vision of oneness (sāmarasya) in pure consciousness (jñaptimātra) that, ever
active, is the power of awareness (citi) free of thought constructs.
mahāśūnye (-śrīūnye) tu gahane niḥspandākhye ‘niketane (niṣpandā-) |
sahasā vilayaṁ yāti citir (citi) yatra sa śāmbhavaḥ || 129 ||

The Śāmbhava (sṭate) is the one in which the power of consciousness

(citi) suddenly (sahasā) dissolves away into the Great Void called the Inactive

(niḥspanda), that is profound and has no abode.
atipraśāntasaṅhāravilayavyomasāgaraḥ |

tasmād īṣaccittaraṅgarūpajñānam ihoditam || 130 ||

tadaiva parahbodhaikarūpaṁ svaspandavigraham |
mantramūrtitayā (mantro-) śāktaṁ vibhātaṁ (dvibhātaṁ)
(niragrahaṁ) || 131 ||

niravagraham

Cognitive awareness (jñāna) arises here in the form of a subtle wave of
consciousness out of that ocean of emptiness, which is the perfectly peaceful
condition of the dissolving away of destruction. Its form is its innate pulsation
(svaspanda), at one with supreme consciousness, and is the empowered (principle)
free of limitation, made manifest as the Form of Mantra (mantramūrti). (130-131)

tatas tad eva sahasā militaṁ paradhāmani |

yatas tasmād iha khyāto melāpo (melāpa) nirniketanaḥ (nirṇiketanaḥ) || 132 |
Then that same (cognitive consciousness) is united forcefully (sahasā) in

the Supreme Abode, and so is here said to be abodeless Union.
mahāsaṁhāragagane so ‘py antarlayam āgataḥ |
Śśāktakramas tato bhāti sadasatkramavarjitaḥ || 133 I|

That also dissolves away inwardly in the Sky of the Great Dissolution, and
so the Sequence of Power (śāktakrama), free of the sequences of being and
nonbeing, manifests.

punas tad eva saṁvittikalanāparivarjitam |
niruttaraṁ paraṁ yat (yata) tat kathitaṁ vyomaśāmbhavam || 134 ||
Again, that same (principle,) completely free of the cognitive process

(saṁvittikalanā), is the supreme absolute (niruttara), said to be the Śāmbhava state

of emptiness (vyomaśāmbhava).

ayaṁ (idaṁ) śrīvīrasiṁhākhyasvāminā (-svāminyā) saṁprakāśitaḥ |

śrījñānanetranāthasya vṛndacakrodayaḥ paraḥ || 135 ||

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

This is the supreme arising of the Wheel of the Aggregate, (taught by) the
venerable Jñānanetranātha, that has been revealed by the master Vīrasiṁha. (135).
bhāvasvabhāvarūpeṇa vṛṇdacakramahodayaḥ |
saṁdarśitas tīvratarapātaviddhadhiyāṁ (-pātraviddha-) satām || 136 ||
The great arising of the Wheel of the Aggregate that takes place in the
form of the inner nature of phenomenal existence within the intellect (dhī) of the

wise, penetrated by the most intense (descent of grace,) has thus been clearly

revealed.

nirdhāmaparamākāśapadān nityavikasvarāt (-ra) |
prasūtāḥ pañcadevyoghabījabhūtāḥ sadoditāḥ || 137 II
The (energies), ever active, that are the seeds of the current of the five

goddesses, are generated from the perpetually expanding plane of the abodeless
and Supreme Sky (of consciousness).

tenaiva pañcacakrākhyakramasvāmī (-kramamvāsvī) vikāsitaḥ (vikāśitaḥ) |
nirvikalpamahājñānaphalaprāptau nirantaraḥ || 138 II
Thiṣ brings about the constant expansion of the Lord of the Sequence of

Five Wheels when the fruit, namely, the Great Knowledge (mahājñāna), free of

thought constructs, is attained without a break.

sa eva prāntacakre tu vīrākhyaḥ pañcakodayaḥ (pañcakoṭyaḥ) |

devatākramaviṣphāram āsphārya phalataḥ ṣadā || 139 ||

He, the arising of the pentad, is called the Hero, (who resides) in the final
Wheel, constantly unfolding the expansion of the sequence of deities
(devatākrama) as the fruit (of this process).
The Descents of Consciousness
prathitā (prathitaḥ) pātavibhavasvabhāvenākramākṛtiḥ |
tasyaiva saṁpravakṣyāmi saṁpradāyaṁ mukhodgatam || 140 I|
The form of the changeless (akrama aspect of consciousness) is perceived
as the innate nature of the glorious power of the descent (pāta of the energies of
consciousness into manifest activity). I will now explain the oral tradition
concerning (its five aspects).
dvandvayugmasvarūpeṇa vāmeśyevoditā sadā (gamā) |
ajasraṁ(ajastraṁ) śāmbhavākhyena gṛhītvā pātam (yātam)āditaḥ || 141 ||

Vāmeśī is perpetually active as the innate nature of the pair of opposites

(dvandvayugma), once having assumed in an instant the first descent (of
consciousness), that is, the one called Sāmbhava.

TANTRĀLOKA

aṣṭābhiḥ śāktarūpābhir devībhiḥ prathitā ( prathitāḥ) svataḥ |
khecaryākhyā gṛhītvātha pātāṁśaṁ (pātaṁśaśva) dvitīyakam || 142 ||
The (goddess) called Khecarī is spontaneously (svataḥ) perceived by
means of the eight Śākta goddesses when she assumes the second aspect of the
descent (of consciousness).

dvādaśātmasvabhāvābhiḥ śaktibhiḥ sarvadotthitā (sarvatotthitāḥ) |
bhūcarī sahasāśritya samyagjñānaṁ (-jñātaṁ) tṛtīyakam || 143 ||
Bhūcarī is constantly generated by her own twelve energies when she

enters with sudden force (sahasā) the third (descent), which is that of right

knowledge (saṁyagjñāna). (143).

caturviṁśatiṣvabhāvābhir devatābhiḥ sadoditā |

saṅṁhārabhakṣiṇy āśritya nityaṁ pātaṁ (yātaṁ) caturthakam || 144 ||
Saṁhārabhakṣiṇī is constantly activated by the twenty-four deities when
she enters the fourth perpetual descent (of consciousness).
dviraṣṭaraśmirūpābhir devībhiḥ proditāntagā |
raudreśvarī samāśritya pātaṁ tu pañcamaṁ (pañca ) kramāt || 145 ||
When, in due order, Raudreśvarī enters the fifth descent she, the last (of

the goddesses), is activated by the goddesses who are the sixteen rays (of
consciousness).

itthaṁ kramākramollāsarūpeṇa prathitāḥ (prathitā) sadā |
pañcavāhasvarūpiṇyo devyo ‘nugrahatatparāḥ || 146 ||
The goddesses who are the Five Currents, intent on grace, are perceived in
this way at all times as the outpouring (of consciousness), which is both sequential
and simultaneous (kramākrama).
nirniketadṛśāpīha (nirṇiketa-) tā eva proditāḥ sphuṭam ḷ

jñānādipañcake bhānti pratyekāsmin (pratyekaṁsmi) nirantarāḥ || 147 1
From the point of view of the Abodeless also, these same (energies) are

clearly active here, and shine without a break in each (member of the) pentad from
the Jñānasiddhas onwards.

garbhasaṁkrãmitollāsaṁ bhakṣyaikaikā (-sa bhaṅtyai(?)kaikā) virājate |
devī pañcātmavṛttiṣṭhā paramāmbaradharmiṇī || 148 |I
Each one shines individually once the outpouring (of diversity) that has

been projected into the womb (of consciousness) has been consumed. (Thus,) the

goddess, established in the five modalities of her own nature, possesses the
attributes of the Supreme Void (of consciousness).
tattvataḥ sarvasaṁkalpavarjitā ye nirantarāḥ |

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

bhāsante yatra tatraiva (tatremās) tadbhāvaṁ yānti saṁvidaḥ || 149 ||
evaṁ pañcātmavibhavaṁ cakraṁ raudreśyadhiṣṭhitam 1

nirūpākhyamahāgrāsarūpān (-rūpā) na cyavate kadā (sada) || 150 ||

Perceptions (saṁvit), which in reality are continuous and devoid of all

thought constructs (and intentions — sarikalpa), assume that (one essential) nature
wherever they manifest. In this way, the Wheel, which is the glorious power
(vibhava) of the five-fold nature (pañcātman), presided over by Raudreśī, never
wavers from its true nature as the inexplicable and great consumption (mahāgrāsa)

(of perceptions into undifferentiated consciousness). (149-150)
dhāmamudrāvarṇakalāsaṁvidbhāvasvabhāvataḥ |
pātāniketadṛṣṭyādi (yātā-) vṛndacakraṁ prakāśitam || 151 1I

(Thus,) the Wheel of the Aggregate (vṛndacakra), the first (of all),

consisting of the Abodes, Seals, Letters, Energies and Cognition (saṁīvid), has
been explained from the point of view of the descents and the Abodeless.
The First Lineage
uḍātīśapīṭtham (udrītha-) āśrītya maṅgalānandanirbharā (pīṭhayā śrīmanmaṅga-

)|

sadasadbhāsanāveśavarjitā tām ahaṁ śraye || 152 ||

1) 1, having entered Udḍdḍīśa’s sacred seat, take refuge in the goddess
Maṅgalā, who is full of bliss and free of penetration (āveśa) into the manifestations
of the presence (of phenomena) and (their) absence (sadasadbhāva).

tataḥ śrīmacchivānandanāthaguruvaraṁ sadã |

lokottaramahājñānacakṣuṣaṁ praṇamāmy aham || 153 II

2) Then I bow at all times to the best of teachers, the venerable
Sivānandanātha, who possesses the eye of great transcendental wisdom

(mahājñāna).

śrīmatkeyiūravatyākhyā (-keryukhatyākhyā) pīṭhajajñānapāragā |
khacakracāriṇī yeyaṁ tām ahaṁ naumi bhaktitaḥ || 154 ||
3) I bow with devotion to the venerable one called Keyuravatī, who has
grasped all the wisdom born of the sacred seat, and wanders in the Wheel of
Emptiness.

mahāvīravaro yo ʻsau śrīmadvāmanasaṁjñakaḥ |
devīdhāmni ṣadārūḍhas taṁ vande kramabhāskaram || 155 II
4) 1 salute the venerable one called Vāmana, the best of great heroes
(mahāvīra), who, ever established in the abode of the goddess, is the sun (that

illumines the) Tradition (krama).

TANTRĀLOKA

tataḥ śrīmaccakrabhānur devatānayadeśikaḥ |
mahāvratadharo yas taṁ vande 'haṁ paradhāmagam || 156 ||
5) Then I salute the venerable Cakrabhānu, teacher of the Devatānaya
(Teachings concerning the Deities) who, observing the Great Vow (mahāvrata) (of
a Kāpālika), has attained the supreme abode.

akramakramasantānakovidā (-santānākovidān) tāṁ namāmy aham || 1 57 1|
6) Ī salute the venerable one called Īśānikā, she who is adorned with the

five insignias (of a Kāpālika) and is well versed in the tradition of the Krama
without stages (akrama).
mahānayaparajñānavibhūtisatpradaḥ (-vibhūṣita-) sadā |
śrīmannandakanāmā yas taṁ namāmi khadhāmagam |I 158 II

7) I salute the venerable one called Nandaka, who resides in the abode of
Emptiness and always dispenses the truth of the wealth of the supreme knowledge
of the Mahānaya (Great Teaching).

śrīmatsajjananāmas taṁ (-nāmānaṁ) rahasyakramaṇirbharam (rahasyaṁ-) |
bhedābhedakalaṅkasya (-kalaṅkastu) varjitaṁ praṇamāmy aham || 159 ||
8) I bow to the venerable one called Sajjana who, devoid of the stain of
both unity and diversity, is full of the secret tradition (rahasyakrama).

nirmalasphaṭikaprakhyahṛdayaṁ vigatāmayam |
śrīmatsomeśvaraṁ vande mahāśāsanapāragam || 160 |
9) I praise the venerable Somesvara, whose heart is as clear as stainless
crystal, and who, free of suffering, has mastered the Great Teaching.
teneha kṛpayā mahyaṁ saṁpradatto mahākramaḥ |
yenāhaṁ navabhir vārṇakalaṅkair nāvṛto ‘niśaṃ (-bhir vāṇaka-) | 161 |I
10) Here, by his grace, I was given the Mahākrama, by virtue of which 1
am never enveloped by new stains of obscuring coverings.
The Second Lineage
atraiva kathyate ‘smadbhir (-smābhir-) dvitīyā gurusantatiḥ |
pīthoditamahāmnāyarahasyakramanṇirbharā || 162 |
Now I will relate the second line of teachers, full of the secret teachings
(rahasyakrama) of the Great Tradition born from the sacred seat.

śrīcakrabhānupādais tu paramārthārthapāragaiḥ |

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

kṛtaprasādo vīrendraḥ (-de vīrendra) śrīprabodhatapodhanaḥ || 163 |
1 and 2) The Lord of Heroes, venerable Prabodha(nātha) the Ascetic, was

graced (with the teachings) by the venerable Cakrabhānu, who had grasped the

highest truth.
tenāhitaprasādas tu jaiyakākhyo mahāvratī|
jñānasaṁkrāntinirbhrāntaḥ ṣvānandānandananditaḥ || 164 ||

3) Graced by the former, the one called Jaiyaka, who observed the Great

Vow (mahāvratin), was free of error by virtue of the transmission of wisdom (he
received), and was delighted by the joy of his own inherent bliss.
tenāpi ca śrīpaṅkākhyaṁ (śrīpaṅkakākhye) dattaḥ (datta) śrīkramaśāsanaḥ |
bhavatadbhrāntivibhrāntividhvaṁsoccaṇḍadīdhitiḥ (bhavatūdbhrānti-) || 165 ||

4) He gave to the venerable one called Paṅka the venerable Krama
teachings, the powerful rays of which shatter phenomenal existence and the
delusion born of the ignorance (it generates).
tenāpi śrīnāganāmā) deśikapravarāgraṇīḥ) |

kṛtaprasādaparamāhlādodayavighūrṇitaḥ (kṛtaprasādopara-) || 166 ||
5) He (in his turn) graced (with the teachings) the venerable and best of
teachers called Nāga, who was thereby inebriated by the arising of the Great Bliss

(mahāhlāda).

tenāpy ahaṁ mahāmnāyavaro ‘smin paramādbhute |
abhiṣiktaḥ (abhisiktaḥ) kṛto ʻthāṇtacittenāvṛttatejasā (krṛyāśrāntacittenā-) || 167

lI

6) By him I have been given the gift of the Great Tradition in this, the

Supreme Wonder, and initiated by the inner mind enveloped with radiant power

(tejas).

itthaṁ proktā santatis tu dvitīyeṣā mahānaye |

nirāveśasamāveśacamatkāraughanirbharā (-camatkārādya-) || 168 I|

In this way this, the second lineage of the Great Teaching, overflowing
with the flood of the wonder of impenetrable (nirāveśa) mystical absorption
(samāveśa), has been declared.

itthaṁ parasparodbhũtaḥ ṣadgurukramaviṣṭaraḥ |
sthito ‘yaṁ divyasiddhākhyamanujñātakrameṇa ca || 169 |I
The entire lineage of true teachers has developed in this way through the
tradition and is, in due order, the Divine, that of the Accomplished Ones (siddha),
and that known by men.

TANTRĀLOKA

saṅṁvitpramāmahādbhūtasamullāsamahodayaḥ h (samvitprāṇamahābhūta- -ya)

abhyantaradrśā iti divyo ʻsau sadgurukramaḥ || 170 II
From the inner point of view, the divine lineage of true teachers is the
Great Arising, which is the outpouring of the great wonder of the pure knowledge
(pramā) of consciousness.

vastutaḥ (vasṣtutat) ṣvasvarollāsaḥ (-sa) prathamaḥ śūnyatātmakaḥ |
yo vibhāti mahābhābhis tam ajaṁ deśikaṁ śraye || 171 II
I take refuge in the unborn master who is made manifest by the great rays
(of consciousness), and is in reality the emptiness which is the first outpouring of
one’s own innate vocalic consciousness (svasvara).
The Five Wombs
pañcagranthisamudbhedakaraṇā yoditā citiḥ |
yatas tasmāt pañcadhotthā (-dhottha) praṇavāvartarūpiṇī |I 172 1|
The active power of consciousness (citi) pierces through the five knots and
so arises five-fold as the circulation of Praṇava.
yeyaṁ tasyā niraupamyaśarīrād (-rā) dīptayas tu yaḥ (sā) |

niyatagrahasaṁhāranirmalā yāḥ (ya) samutthitāḥ (samutthitā) || 173 |I

tā eva gaditāḥ (gaṁ-) pañcayonayaḥ paradhāmagāḥ |
niyatagrahasaṁsthānakalpanāparivarjitāḥ || 174 ||

Brilliant flames, pure due to the withdrawal

of (all) conditioned

perception, arise from its incomparable body. These are said to be the Five
Wombs, established in the supreme abode and completely free of the
conceptualization which fashions the configurations (saṁsthāna) of conditioned
perceptions. (173-174)
kavargādipavargāntapañcapañcakaviṣṭaraiḥ (-re) |
vyaktāvyaktākhyaracanā mudriteha samantataḥ || 175 I|
The deployment of the manifest and unmanifest (aspects of reality) is
sealed here on all sides by the twenty-five (energies) of the five classes of letters
ranging from K to M.
ābhir akramarūpābhir yonibhiḥ pañcābhiḥ (pañcabhiḥ) svataḥ |
nirāvaraṇanirdhāma vapus tena (vapuṣasvena) nityaśaḥ || 176 ||
These Five Wombs, free of change (akrama), spontaneously form at all
times the abodeless, unobscured body (of consciousness).
The Sequence of Emanation
akramakramavisphāradrśā (-diśā) nirṇīyate ‘vyayaḥ |

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

parahr̥dāntasthaḥ (parāhṛdayatayā) sṛṣṭikramo ‘yaṁ sarvago ʻmitaḥ l| 177 II

Thus will (now) be explained from the point of view of the unfolding of

the processless process (of manifestation), this, the imperishable, omnipresent and

unlimited sequence of emanation (sṛṣṭikrama) that resides within the supreme heart

(of consciousness).

udyogaḥ (udyoga) prathamā (prathamo) yonir dvitīyābhāsa ucyate |
carvaṇaṁ Śśaṁkhayonyākhyā tṛtīyāvartarūpiṇī || 178 II
caturthī padmayonis tu kālagrāsavikasvarā (vi-svarā) |
viśrāntiḥ kathitā devī divyayonisvarūpiṇī I 179 ||
Exertion (udyoga) is the first Womb, while manifestation (bhāsā) is said to

be the second. Relishing (carvaṇa) is called the Conch Womb, which forms the

third circle, while the fourth is the Lotus Womb, blooming with the dissolution of

time (kālagrāsa). (The fifth) is repose (viśrānti), said to be the goddess who is the
Divine Womb. (178-179)
nistaraṅgodadhiprakhyakālīdhāmny avibhedataḥ |
sphurantīyaṁ sthitā nityaṁ sṛr̥ṣṭisaṁvittitattvataḥ |l 180 I|

She abides perpetually undivided as the principle of emanating
consciousness (srstisaṁvitti), pulsating radiantly in Kāḹr’s abode, which is (pure
and calm) like a waveless ocean.
svaṣvarūpā jagadrūpasiddhāliṅgitavigrahāḥ |
devyaḥ prathante satataṁ asparśapadamadhyagāḥ || 181 ||
The goddesses, who are one’s own innate nature, are embraced by the

Siddhas, who are the universe and, in the centre of the (transcendental) state devoid

of contact (with phenomenal existence — asparśapada) perceive (all things —
prathante) perpetually.
The Four Yuganāthas
anayoktadṛśā proktaḥ (proktāḥ) sṛṣṭicakrodayaḥ paraḥ |
niḥsvabhāvaniraupamyaparonmeṣasvarūpabhṛt || 182 ||
jāgratsvapnasuṣuptyākhyaturyonmeṣaprathodayāḥ |
ye sthitāḥ satataṁ proccaiḥ paramādvayadharmiṇaḥ || 183 II
teṣāṁ pramātr̥yapuṣā niṣṭhitā vyomadhāmagāḥ |
khagendrādyāḥ siddhavarāḥ (-rā) sadā bhedagrahojjhitāḥ || 184 1I
vākcatuṣṭayarūpasya samullāsaikahetavaḥ |
te saṁvidraśmayo dīptā nirlakṣā (nilakṣā) niravagrahāḥ || 185 ||

The supreme arising of the Wheel of Emanation has (also) been explained

from this, the aforementioned point of view, to be the supreme expansion (of
consciousness) that is incomparable and devoid of (any phenomenal) nature of its
own (niḥsvabhāva). Those rays of consciousness (sarīvidraśmi) that, luminous

TANTRĀLOKA

(dīpta), free of phenomenal signs (nirlakṣa) and limitations, are the sole cause of
the outpouring of the four levels of speech, are the best of Siddhas, namely,
Khagendra and the rest who, always free of the perception of duality, reside in the
abode of the Void (of pure consciousness ~ vyomadhāman) in the form of the
perceiving subject. They are manifestations (udaya) of the perception (prathā) of
the unfolding of the Fourth State, along with (those) called waking, dreaming and
deep sleep which, endowed with supreme unity (paramādvaya), always abide with
the highest (principles). (182-185)
vyaktāvyaktākhyaghaṭanā ṣaṇḍhasvaracatuṣṭaye |

yeyaṁ (peyaṁ) tadbhakṣaṇāyālam utthito ‘yaṁ (-bhakṣaṇāpā-) samantataḥ |l

1861|

parādvayavikāṣaikarūpo niravadhiḥ sadā |
so ‘vatāraḥ samākhyātaḥ paravarṇakramoḍditaḥ || 187 ||
That (i.e., the state of persistence) is said to be an embodiment of

consciousness (avātara) which is generated from the sequence of the Supreme
Letter. It is nothing but the expansion of supreme oneness which, without end,
takes place at all times. It arises all around in order to consume the entire creation

(ghaṭanā), manifest and unmanifest, contained in the four neuter letters. (186-187)

Khagendra
khagaḥ paramahaṁsātmaspandadeho ‘vinaśvaraḥ |
tasyendro ‘sparśarūpo ‘yaṁ (tasyondrosparśa- -yaḥ) khagendraḥ sa nigadyate ||

1881I

The indestructible Skyfarer (khaga) is the one whose body is the pulsation

(of consciousness and vitality) which is the Supreme Self (paramahaṁsa). His
lord (indra) who is this (absolute,) free of contact (with the phenomenal world
asparśarūpa), is said to be Khagendra.

dhāmatritayasaṁhāragrāsako vimaleśvaraḥ (vimaleśvare) |
yo ʻjasraṁ gacchati paraṁ (paraḥ) khagendraḥ so ʻmitaḥ smr̥taḥ || 189 ||
The pure Lord who consumes the destruction of the three abodes (of

emanation, persistence and destruction) and, limitless, attains the supreme (state) in
a moment, is said to be Khagendra.

Kūrmanātha
prathamapratibhonmeṣamahimā yo ‘dvayaḥ paraḥ |

jagadvicitraracanāṁ pr̥thagbhedaprathātmikām || 190 ||
kūrmo ‘ṅgānīva satataṁ garbhe dhatte ‘vibhedataḥ |
sa eva kūrmanāthākhyaḥ kalpanāvaraṇojjhitaḥ || 191 ||

He who is one (advaya), supreme, and whose glorious power is the
unfolding of the first (impulse of the) cosmogonic imagination (pratibhā), who

constantly withdraws into (himself) the womb (of emanation), undivided, the

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

wonderful (and diverse) deployment of all things, that is, the perception of

individual differences, as does the tortoise its limbs, is the one called Kūrmanātha,

free of the obscuration of thought constructs (kalpanāvaraṇa). (190-191)
Meṣanātha

svonmeṣeṇa (svonmeṣaṇa) svaātantratvād gṛhītvendriyarūpatām |
aluptānākhyamahimā viṣayagrāmavartmani || 192 ||
yo yuktāyuktaghaṭanāṁ saṁtyajya vicaret sadā |
sonmeṣaḥ (sameṣa) satatodyuktaḥ (satodyuktaḥ) sa meṣākhyaḥ prakīrtitaḥ || 193

I

He who, by virtue of the innate expansion (of his own consciousness) and

freedom, assumes the nature of the senses, without (this thereby) diminishing the

glorious power of the Inexplicable (anākhya Fourth State of consciousness) in the
sphere of the objects of sense and who, abandoning (all) exertion (for what is
conventionally considered to be) right or wrong, moves (freely) at all times, is
known as Meṣanātha who, endowed with the
consciousness), is ever intent (on realisation). (192-193)

expansion

(unmeṣa

of

Matsyendranātha
dyayādvayasvarūpāṇāṁ śāstā yaḥ sarvasaṁvidām |
samanirdhāmavapuṣo mama cchedanena (cchandena) tiṣṭhati || 194 ||
sa eva procyate śrīmān matsyendraḥ (matsyeṁduḥ) kṛtakaḥ paraḥ |
He who is the master of all forms of perception, whether dual or nondual,
whose body is everywhere equally present and (yet) without abode, and abides by

the destruction of egoism, is said to be the venerable Matsyendranātha, the
supreme doer (of all things). (194-5ab)

nistaraṅgaparākāśaparamādvayavigrahaḥ || 195 I|
pratyāvṛttikrameṇemāḥ sāmarasyaṁ nijātmani |
vrttīḥ saṁprāpayati yaḥ sa mīnākhyaḥ prakīrtitaḥ || 196 I|
He whose form is the (one) supreme and nondual (reality) which is the

supreme Void (parākāśa) free of alterations (nistaraṅga), who makes all these
modalities (of consciousness) one in his own essential nature through the process
of reversal (pratyāvṛttikrameṇa), is famed as (the teacher) called Mīnanātha.

(195cd-196)

prollāsanījavisṣphāraśaktyabhinnaprathodayāḥ |
vibhānti sadasadbhedamuktāḥ siddhāḥ samantataḥ || 197 I|
The Siddhas shine everywhere, free of the duality of being and nonbeing.

They are the arising of the undivided perception (prathā) of the energy of the
outpouring of their own expansion (of consciousness).

anayoktadṛśā prokto (proktā) niravagrahavigrahaḥ (niraṁvagraha-) |

TANTRĀLOKA

nirāvaraṇaṉirdhāmamahimābhāṣaviṣṭaraḥ || 198 I|

The unconditioned form of reality explained from this point of view is the

expanse of the manifestation of the glorious power (mahimā) that is unobscured
and without abode.

The Sequence of Destruction
śrotādipañcakagaṇaḥ pramātā manasāñjitaḥ (-sāñcitaḥ) |

buddhīndriyeṇa saṁyuktaṁ tathā vāmādipañcakam || 199 ||
evaṁ dvādaśadhāmākhyo (-dhāmastho) yas tv akṣagrāmaviṣṭaraḥ |
sa eva buddhivibhraṁśād (-ṣā) nirvicārapadāśritaḥ (-padasśritaḥ) || 200 |I
The group of five (organs of perception) beginning with the sense of
hearing (together with) the individual perceiving subject, coloured by the mind and
conjoined to the intellect, along with the pentad beginning with Vāmā, constitute
the extent of the aggregate of the senses known as the Twelve-fold Abode. By the
falling away of the intellect, it abides in the state free of deliberation (nirvicāra).

(199-200)

niyatagrahasaṁsthānavarjito ʻkramamūrtimān |
sarvasaṁhãranirataḥ khaṇḍacakrakramaḥ paraḥ lI 201 Il
The very form of the changeless (akrama), devoid of the configurations of
conditioned perceptions, intent on the withdrawal of all things — such is the
supreme sequence of the Broken Wheel (khaṇḍacakrakrama).
ekādaśavidhastīkṣṇaḥ saṁtyaktā (-kta) kalanāvaliḥ |
vuktāyuktadaśātīto nityoditasvadhāmagaḥ (-ditaravadhāmagaḥ) || 202 |
pakārādihakārantā varṇāḥ (varṇā) kṣakārasaṅyutāḥ |
vyaktāvyaktakrameṇeyaṁ kalpanā prathitā tu ṣā |
tadbhakṣaṇaparaḥ (-bhakṣaṇaḥ-) prokto bhāvābhāvatamojjhitaḥ l| 204 ||
nirupādhimahābodharaśmyullāsamayodayaḥ (-cayo-) |
etad (sa) evocyate sadbhiḥ saṁhārākhyo ‘vyayakramaḥ || 205 ||
Powerful (tīkṣṇa) in eleven ways and free of the process of manifestation

(kalanāvali), beyond the plane of good (yukta) and evil (ayukta), established in its
own ever-active abode: this is said by the wise to be the eternal process known as

Dissolution (saṁhāra). 1t is the arising (udaya of the process) consisting of the

outpouring of the rays of the great, unconditioned consciousness that is said to be

free of the darkness of being and nonbeing. t is intent on consuming thought that,
perceived through the sequence of the manifest and unmanifest, abides at all times

within the eleven energies of the letters beginning with PA and ending with HA
(ie., PA, PHA, BA, BHA, MA, YA, RA, LA, VA and HA) along with KṢA.

grāhyagrāhakavisphāro daśadhā yo vyavasthitaḥ |

pratyāvṛttiṣvabhāvaikarūpo nādodayānvitaḥ || 206 ||
itthamekādaśavidhaḥ saṁvidullāsaviṣṭaraḥ |

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

tasyaiva bhedavibhavagrasanāya samutthitaḥ || 207 I|
The ten-fold expansion of subject and object, along with the arising of the

resonance (nāda of consciousness) which is one in nature with (the process of)

reversal (pratyāvṛtti), in this way constitutes the eleven-fold expanse of the

outpouring of consciousness, manifest to consume the energy of its own duality
(bheda). (206-207)
mahābhakṣādirūpiṇyo niśitā dīptayogagāḥ (-māḥ) |
yās tā eveha saṁhāre (-ra) sahasā bhānti niṭyaśaḥ || 208 II

Here, in the state of withdrawal, the mighty energies, Mahābhakṣā and the

rest are in a state of energized union (dīptayogaga) and shine perpetually with
immense force (sahasā).

daśendriyasamārūḍho ‘haṁkāro (-rūḍhe-) madadarpitaḥ |
evam ekādaśavidho bhāti yo bhedaviśrutaḥ || 209 ||
The ego, haughty with inebriation, seated on the ten senses and wellversed in the ways of duality and of eleven kinds, shines in this way.
tat saṅhãrãya satataṁ kãlasaṁkarṣaṇĩ citiḥ |

tasyāṁśuraśmivisphāraiḥ (tatsaṁkṣu-) proditā kramataḥ sadā || 210 ||

The power of consciousness (citi), that is, Kālasaṁkarṣaṇī (the One who
Withdraws Time into herself), arises constantly and progressively (kramataḥ) by
the expansions of the rays of that (the ego’s eleven) aspects in order to withdraw it.


ayaṁ saṅṁhāracakrasya guruvaktrakramoditaḥ |
saṁpradāyaḥ paraḥ ko ʻpi sākṣāt prakatito mayā || 211

|I

I have (thus) directly revealed this, the supreme and inscrutable (ko'pi)
tradition, born of the lineage of the Master’s Mouth, concerning the Wheel of
Withdrawal.

The Sequence of the Inexplicable
svaṁ svaṁ viṣayam āhṛtya pratyāvṛttikramāgataḥ |
ciccamatkārabharito dvādaśākṣiṣvaro gaṇaḥ || 212 ||
The group of twelve vowels, associated with the senses, full of the wonder
of consciousness, enters the process of reversal (pratyāvṛttikrama), once having
withdrawn back from their respective objects.
yas taṁ saṁhr̥tya sahasā praśāntā dīptayogagāḥ (-yogamāḥ) |
niṣṭaraṅgamahāvyomarūpiṇyas turyacakragāḥ || 213 I|

TANTRĀLOKA

Once having withdrawn that (group of twelve) through the force of
consciousness (sahasā), (they become) tranquil and, in a state of energized union
(dīptayogaga), reside in the Wheel of the Fourth State, in the form of the vast,
waveless sky of consciousness.
aprameyaniraupamyasāmarasyaikavigrahāḥ |
nirūpākhyamahāgrāsadhāmasthā bhānti nityaśaḥ || 214 ||
They (thus) shine perpetually in the abode of the great and inexplicable
dissolution (mahāgrāsa), their one form incomparable and objectless oneness
(sāmaraṣya).
akārādiviṣargāntā ye ṣaṇḍhasvaravarjitāḥ |
teṣām evāśu yugapad vyaktāvyaktasvarūpatā || 215 ||
saṁhartum (saṁhatum) uditā devyo nirahaṁkāravigrahāḥ |
nirvikalpamahāvyomadīptayo vigatāśrayāḥ || 216 ||
The goddesses, their form egolessness (nirahaṁkāra), free of (outer)

support, energized by the great sky of consciousness free of thought constructs,

arise to withdraw simultaneously and in an instant (asu), the manifest and

unmanifest nature of these, (the twelve vowels) beginning with A and ending with
Emission, free of (the four) neuter (letters). (215-216)
parādyā sā udety (parādyunmorūṭity) eva sphuritānandaghūrṇitā (-tāḥ) |
yākramaspandalaharī (-syanda-) vidyullekhaiva (-kheva) cañcalā || 217 |I|
The supreme primordial (goddess) who arises in this way, inebriated by
the radiant, pulsing bliss (of consciousness), is the wave of the processless
(akrama) vibration (of consciousness), as fleeting and fickle as a lightning flash.


tasyā udayasaṁsthānasaṁhārodrekakalpanā |
trividhā samakālena proditā kalanojjhitā || 218 I|
Her creative imagination (kalpanā) is generated by the intensification of
the state of withdrawal of the configuration (sarṁsthāna) of the arising (udaya of
the energies of consciousness) and, free of the phenomenal process (of creation and
destruction — kalanā), arises simultaneously three-fold.

tasyā hi (pi) triprakārākhyā kalpanā yā samantataḥ |
pratyekaśaḥ (-śa) svarūpo ‘pi sṛṣṭyādikramasaṁjñakaḥ (-ke) |1 219 ||
caturthonmiṣitaṁ (caturthormiśitaṁ) rūpam udyogādivibhedataḥ |

” The so-called ‘neuter’ vowels - r Ṛ 1 Ḷ — are a mix of pure vowel sounds with a touch

of the semi-vowels R and L. As the vowels symbolize the subjective energies and the
consonants the objective ones, they symbolize objectivity in the stream of subjective
cognitive activity represented by the series of vowels. When these are absent, the flow
of inner consciousness is free of ‘outer supportʼ.

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

This three-fold creative imagination (kalpanā) (that takes place) all around
is of that (dynamic consciousness). The essential nature of each one (of its aspects)
is called emission and the rest (i.e., persistence and withdrawal).

The fourth,

(fully) expanded form, is divided into (the four moments) of exertion (udyoga)
(manifestation, destruction and the cessation of time). (219-220ab)

evaṁ dviṣaṭkasaṅvittikramo bhāti nirāvṛtaḥ || 220 ||

srṣṭikālyādibhedena prathitaughodadhiḥ (prathitokhadhiḥ) paraḥ |
nirālambavikāsaikamahimā (-vikāśaika-) satatoditaḥ || 221 ||

The supreme ocean of the flux of what has been perceived (prathita) is
perpetually active and is the one glorious power of the self-sustained (nirālamba)
expansion

(of consciousness).

Unobscured,

the twelve-fold

sequence of

consciousness is manifest in this way as Sṛṣṭikālī and the rest. (220cd-221)

tasyaiva haṭhasaṁhãravr̥ttyā durdarśamūrtimān |
kramākramobhayottīrṇaraśmipuñjātighasmaraḥ (-puñjeti-) || 222 ||
svarūpaṁ kartum udyukto niṣṭaraṅgo ʻniketanaḥ |
sparśāsparśapadātītarūpatvād (-padābhīta-) vigatottaraḥ || 223 ||
praśāntātipraśāntaikamahimāvikṛtaprabhaḥ (- mahimākṛtakaprabhaḥ) |
(This) network of rays transcends both process and its absence and,

extremely voracious, its form is terrible to behold. Abodeless and waveless, it is

beyond the plane of contact (with phenomena) and its absence (sparśāsparśa), and
so there is nothing higher. This, the undistorted light of the one glorious energy of
the most tranquil (consciousness), abides intent upon fashioning (in this way) its
own nature by its activity of (sudden and) violent (haṭha) withdrawal (of all things
into itself). (222-224ab)

itthaṁ saṁhãrasaṁhãraraśmyoghaḥ parikĩr̥titaḥ || 224 ||

evaṁ dhāmādibhedena trividhaḥ prakatīkṛtaḥ |

devikākramasadbhāvo ‘py alaṁgrāsaikaghasmaraḥ || 225 ||
Such is said to be the flux of the rays of the destruction of destruction
(saṁhārasaṁhāra), revealed as three-fold in terms of (the sequence of) abodes,

(letters and consciousness); it is the one consuming fire (of consciousness) of the
assimilation of all things (alaṁgrāsa) and the essence of the Sequence of

Goddesses (devikākrama). (224cd-225)

āsāṁ dviṣaṭkadevīnāṁ vamanagrāsatatparām (-grasatat -) |

devīṅ trayodaśīṁ vande tādātmyapratipattaye || 226 ||

I praise the thirteenth goddess, who is intent on emitting and devouring
these, the twelve goddesses, that I may attain oneness (with her).

mahābhairavanāmādībhairavaṁ tritayaṁ sadā |

pratyekasargarūpādi caturdhā saṁvyavasthitam || 227 ||

TANTRĀLOKA

Each triad of Bhairavas, namely, Mahābhairava and the rest, abides four-

fold at all times in the form of creation (persistence, destruction and the
inexplicable).
ittham ugrasvarūpo “yaṁ bhairaveśakramaḥ paraḥ |

vibhāti dvādaśātmaikasvabhāvaḥ kālavarṇjitaḥ || 228 I|

In this way this supreme and terrible sequence of Lord Bhairava manifests
devoid of time as the one innate nature of the twelve-fold reality.

The Goddess
tasyaiva satataṁ devī haṭhāt kavalanoditā |
yatas tasmāt samākhyātā devī nāmnopacārataḥ || 229 ||
vastutaḥ ṣvasti naivāsyā nāmarūpaprakalpanā |
mahāsaṁhāracakreśyāḥ sarvottīrṇasvarūpataḥ || 230 ||
The goddess is perpetually intent on devouring him with violent force
(haṭhāt). Thus, she is said to be the goddess (only) in a secondary sense. In fact, it
is wrong to conceive of her as having either name or form, for the mistress of the

great Wheel of Withdrawal transcends all things. (229-230)
cidānandaparispandavibhavaḥ pīṭhatāṁ gataḥ |

yasmāt (yasyā) seheti ṣatataṁ gocaratvaṁ samantataḥ || 231 I|

The glorious power of the pulse (pariṣpanda) of the bliss of consciousness

has become the sacred seat (of cosmic manifestation), and so the (goddess) comes

here, everywhere, and at all times, within the purview of the senses.

avibhinnasvarūpatvād vāmeśvaryā nirākṛte |
tatprasādavaśāt (tāprasāda(?)vaśāt) samyā vṛndāntanāma visphuṭaṁ || 232 ||

When, due to (her one) undivided nature, Vāmeśvarī has dissolved away
(nirākṛta), she, by virtue of that, is equal (santyā in every state and aspect) and is
clearly manifest as the cessation of the Aggregate (vrnda of energies).

mahājñāṅamahāyogakaraṇādikramair api |
na tu gocaratām eti devīyaṁ sarvagā satī || 233 ||
This goddess, present everywhere, is never perceivable, even by means of
the processes that generate the Great Knowledge, the Great Union and the rest.


guruprasādenāviṣṭā ( -prasādataś citraṁ) kecit taṉmayadharmiṇaḥ |
bhavanti vyomavṛttyaikasvabhāvā nātra saṁśayaḥ || 234 ||
Certain (yogis), penetrated by the teacher’s grace and endowed with that

same nature, are one with the (universal) activity of the Void (of consciousness).

There is no doubt about it!

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

bhāvasvabhāvarūpeha sṛṣṭyādīnāṁ virājate |
niṣṭhā tadyugmavisphāravarjitāpi samantataḥ || 235 ||
nirniketamahāsaṁviddharmiṇī (nirṇiketa-) vigatagrahā |
(The goddess is) here the essential nature of phenomenal existence and the
ground state (niṣṭhā) of emanation and the rest. Although devoid of the expansion
of those polarities (yugma), She manifests everywhere free of limitation, her nature
the great and abodeless consciousness. (235-6ab)

The Wheel of the Goddess
itthaṁ mahãnaye bhãti pũjākramamahodayaḥ || 236 ||
udyogasyaikadeśe ‘pi devatācakraviṣṭaraḥ |
prasphuraty (-sphuranty) avibhāgena vyomavṛttyaikatāṁ (vyomavṛntyaikatāī)

gataḥ |I 237 I|

The great arising of the liturgy of the rite of adoration (pāūjākrama)

manifests thus in the Great Teaching (mmahānaya); although just an aspect of the

exertive force of consciousness (udyoga), the extension of the Wheel of Deities
manifests undivided, and has become one with the (universal) activity of the
expanse (of consciousness, vyomavṛtti). (236cd-237)
itthaṁ sadaiva sarvatra devīnām udayaḥ paraḥ |
niṣṭhito ‘pi satāṁ gamyo niravagrahavigrahaḥ || 238 II

Although the arising of the deities, supreme and unlimited, is established

in this way everywhere and all times, it is attainable (only) by the wise.

samastotthavyastadehaḥ samastavyastasvarūpabhṛt (samastavyasta rūpa-) |
vyastādyas tu samastāntaḥ sthito 'yaṁ devatākramaḥ || 239 ||

The Sequence of the Deities possesses (both) universal (consciousness

samasta) and (all) particular (perceptions vyasta). Its body consists of the
particulars that arise from universal (consciousness) and abides (as all things,)

beginning with particulars and ending with universal (consciousness).
tatraivānārataṁ prodya tridhā pañcamahodayaḥ |
bhāti dīyvyaughavisphāravībhavāntaḥsthito ‘vyayaḥ || 240 ||

Emerging incessantly there itself, the fifteen-fold Great Arising shines and

abides as the imperishable (reality) within the glorious power of the expansion of

the divine flux (of consciousness — divyaugha).

devīcakrodaragato navasaṁhāraviṣṭaraḥ |
samsthito 'pi nirālambamahimākalpanojjhitaḥ || 241 ||
This is the extension of the nine-fold withdrawal (sarṁhāra) that, although

established in the womb of the Wheel of the Goddess, is free of the creative

TANTRĀLOKA

imagination (kalpanā), which is the unsupported (self-sustaining) and glorious
power (of consciousness).

The Lord
itthaṁ pīthādhipaḥ (-dhikaḥ) śāśvan (śaśvan) navacakrodayaḥ paraḥ |
cakāsti bahurūpaikarūpo (vahupuṣṭyaika-) niṭyavikasvaraḥ || 242 ||
The Lord of the Sacred Seat, who is the supreme and perpetual arising of

the nine Wheels, shines, constantly unfolding, as the one nature of the many.

sa eva deśikavaro (-varai) rekhākarmādivarjitaḥ |
paramaṇḍalapīṭhaikasvabhāvas tu nirūpitaḥ (-pite) || 243 II
itthaṁ nãnãrthasaṁsthãānadhãāmãditritayātmanã |
He indeed is the best of teachers, described thus as the triad of the abodes
(letters and consciousness), which is the configuration (saṁsthāna) of the many

existing things. (But though) one with the supreme seat of maṇḍala, he is not
drawn (or fashioned in any other way). (243-244ab)

nirlakṣaprathamonmeṣe (-ṣa) ūrvakoṭiṣvarūpiṇī || 244 ||
cakracakreśvarīrūpakrameṇaikaiva (-keva) kālikā |

vibhāty anāratā samyak nirahaṁkāradharmiṇī|/ 245 ||

The goddess Kālikā is the reality which, inscrutable, marks the beginning
of the first expansion (of consciousness into manifestation). One and devoid of all
egoity (nirahamkaradharmiṇī), She shines perfectly and at all times by virtue of
the process (krama) which is the very nature of Cakreśvarī, the Mistress of the

Wheel. (244cd-245)

anayoktadṛśā proktam ekarūpavapuḥ (-puṣpavapuḥ) param |
arāvarāvavisphāraṁ (-ra) mantrapīṭhaman argalam || 246 ||

The supreme Seat of Mantra (mantrapīṭha), which is the expansion of the
Soundless Sound (of consciousness), free of all limitations, whose body is the one

supreme reality, has been explained from this point of view.

Conclusion
itthaṁ vyāvartitāpy (-tāp) eyaṁ nānārthaikatvakalpanā |
nirṇiketasvarūpatvān (-rūpatvā) nayottīrṇaṁ (tayo-) vibhāvyate || 247 |I
Although this conception (kalpanā) of the oneness of the many is brought

about in this way, it has no fixed locus (nirniketa), and so is realised as the

transcendent, beyond the teachings (nayottīrṇa).

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

aprameyamahāvyomavṛttirāpam (apremeya-) anāśrayam |
devīpītham ajaṁ yat tad adhyuṣṭākhyaṁ (apuṣṭyākhyā) nirāvṛtam (narāvṛtā) |l

248 I|

# iṇṣpandasaṁdhānojjhitavigraham (nisṣpandasandhānojjhitavigraha) |
sarvatrāvasthitaṁ vande vācātītam anāmayam || 249 ||
(This transcendent reality) is the (all-encompassing) activity of the great
expanse (of consciousness mahāvyomavṛtti), which is not an object of perception

and has no (phenomenal) foundation. Unobscured and unborn, it is the (one)
Sacred Seat of the Goddess and is called Kuṇḍalinī (adhyuṣṭa). 1I praise that

omnipresent reality which, free of imperfections and beyond speech, is free of
(extrinsic) links (and contemplation (sarṁīdhāna) and inaction (nihspanda) #.

(248-249)

yady apy ayaṁ mukhāmnāyayuktyā samtyak (samtyaṅ) nirūpitaḥ |

akramakramasadbhāvasaṁgrahasyaikanirbharaḥ (aṁkra(?)makra-) || 250 ||
tathāpy etat samuttīrṇaṁ (samuttīrṇā) vastu vaktuṁ na pāryate |

samayakṣatibhīrutvāt (-tvā) vijñeyaṁ guruvaktrataḥ || 251 ||

Although this reality, namely, the unitary flux of the totality of the essence
of the processless process (of the activity of consciousness) has been correctly
described according to the oral tradition, even then, (I) cannot say everything about
this transcendental reality for fear of breaking the rule (samaya).
(therefore) leam it (directly) from the masterʼs lips. (250-251)

One should

vimohād iha keṣāṁcid vidyoktyābhāsavibhramaḥ (-vidhoktyā-) |
rājate yena (yona) vijñānaṁ na tena (sa) tattvadaṁ (-dāṁ) sthitam (sthitaḥ) ||

252II

Due to (their) ignorance (vimoha, they suffer from) the illusion that what

has been told (to them) appears to be wisdom. It is because of this that (their)

knowledge appears (to be true but) does not give (access) to reality.
sākṣād mahānayamayaḥ (mahāmayamayaṁ) prakāśaḥ prakaṭīkṛtaḥ |
so 'yaṁ mayārṇasiṁhena saddeśikamukhodgataḥ || 253 1I
tam eva parameḻāpasaṁpradāyopabṛṁhitam (-taḥ) |

vibudhāś carvaṇanty uccair jīvanmuktyātmasiddhaye || 254 ||
1I, Arṇasiṁha, have directly revealed the Light which is the Great Teaching
(mahānaya), come from the lips of a true master. That (teaching), augmented by
the teaching (received) through Supreme Union, is relished by the wise, to attain
liberation in this very life. (253-254)

abuddhaṁ (avu (?)) manmataṁ yena (yana) madvaktrād abudho janaḥ |
mahānayam ayaṁ śāstraṁ sṣvavikalpair vikalpayan || 255 ||
garjaty abudhabudhīnāṁ punaḥ pānāsavakṣaye (pānāsanakṣaṇe) |
namo ‘stu kṛtine tasmai sadṛṣṭityāgine param || 256 ||
The unawakened, that is, the person by whom my teaching, which has not

been understood by means of (the teachings) from my mouth (or that of a true

TANTRĀLOKA

teacher), conceiving the scripture (śāstra) which is the Great Teaching according to
(his) own notions, proclaims it to those of unawakened intellect . . . (?) Salutations
to the creator, to the supreme one who, when the wine (he drinks deceitfully) has
finished, abandons (all things,) including (true) insight and the supreme (reality)!

(255-256)

paramapaṇḍitakulācāryaśrī arṇasiṁhaviracitaṁ (Śśrī -) mahānayaprakāśam
( # # sk .) aṃāpṭam |)

The Mahānayaprakāśa, written by the most excellent Paṇḍit and

Kulācārya Arṇasiṁha, is finished.

Appendix I

to Chapter Four

The Twelve Kālīs and the Cycle of the Inexplicable

according to Chapter Nine of the Trivandrum Mahānayaprakāśa
yat sargasthitisaṁhr̥ikramamayaiś cakrair upārūpitaṁ (> uparūṣitaṁ)
na () svasmāc cyavate manāg api padād viśrāntilābhātmikāt |
āviśyātha tad akramakramakalottirṇaprathaṁ sāmprataṁ
tat saṅkrāmam anākhyacakram ucitair yuktikramair dṛśyate |I 1 II
Seemingly strewn with the cycles (cakra) of the processions of creation,
persistence and withdrawal, (but even s0,) not falling even slightly from its own
plane, which is the attainment of rest. Having entered into that transcendental
extension (prathā) which is the energy of that processless process
(akramakrama), it īs now the transmission (saṁnkrāma) (of realisation) which is
the cycle of the Inexplicable (anākhyacakra), perceived by the appropriate
processes of contemplation (yuktikrama).
itthaṁ gurvātmadevānāṁ kathanādikam ātmanā |
lolībhāvasthitaṁ nityaṁ sarvānubhavabhūmiṣu || 2 |I
abhede ‘pi (-do ‘pi) kilodrekād eteṣāṁ bheda iṣyate |
tam āśrityānurūpeṇa prameyaṁ pratipādyate || 3 |I
In this way, the (Teacher’s) Speech (kathana), (that transmits
realisation) (inner worship — pūjana and transmission of the state of realisation —

saṇkrāmaṇam) of the Guru, Self and Deity, abides as oneself in dynamic

union (lolībhāva) constantly on all the planes of experience. (2). But although
(one and) undivided, due the relative predominance of one or the other, they are

considered to be different. The object of knowledge is grasped in accord with
(the one with which it is) associated (2-3).

prāyo hi maithune madye māṁse ca paridṛśyate |
āsaktiḥ sarvajantūnāṁ viśeṣāt kasyacit kvacit |I 4 II
yadi tattyāgasaṁrambhaḥ pūrvaṁ teṣāṁ vidhīyate |
upadeśo na sa manāg api citte prarohati || 5 II
janmāntaraśatābhyastā viṣayeṣu matir nṛṇām |
jaradgauriva sasyebhyaḥ sā hi duḥkhena vāryate || 6 |I
iti saṁvādatas teṣāṁ parityāgo hi duṣkaraḥ |
abhyasīūyanti te yasmād upadeśakarāya ca || ||
yathāsthitopabhogātmapūrvaṁ yat tūpadiśyate |
tatrādhirūḍhir lokasya śraddhāpūrvaṁ prajāyate || 8 II
Everybody is generally seen to be attached to sex, wine and meat; some
in particular are more so in some places (than others). If the teaching imparted
'! Concerning these three ways the teacher and deity bring about realisation, see notes
to TAv ad 2/2.

TANTRĀLOKA

to them requires that they first give up these things, it does not develop even
slightly in their minds. The mind (mati) of people, that for hundreds of births
has been in the habit (of enjoying) sense objects, is hard to control, just as it is
hard to prevent an old cow (when given the chance) from grazing on (a
farmerʼs) crops. As this example (suggests), it is hard for (people) to renounce
them. Even so, they are in need of instruction. The teaching that is based on the
enjoyment (of these things) as they are is believed by people who are given

there (to these things). (4-8)

prathaikarūpãbhãvãc (> -rūpabhāvāc) ca nirhviyante (> nirvahyate) tataḥ

katham |

prathāyā bhāvaparyantaṁ rūpaṁ tad bhidyate katham || 9 Il
bhedasś ced kalpyate tarhi kalpaneyaṁ na satyabhūḥ |
sphuraṇād eva vai teṣāṁ gālanaṁ nāpi tāttvikam || 10 ||
tac ca kalpair asaṅkhyeyair bahuduṣkaracaryayā |
na cāsti sphuraṇābhāvo (sphura -) hy anyasyānupalambhataḥ || 1 1 II
abhāvamātraṁ nāsty eva syāc cet tad bhāti sarvadā |
tasmāt tattvam atattvaṁ vā na bhāvena vinā bhavet || 12 ||
svasāmrājyavaśād bhānaṁ satattvātattvayoḥ samam ḷ
If that is explained (to be s0) because cognitive consciousness (prathā)
has a single (uniform) nature, then how can the form of perception be

differentiated (from the initial phase of perception) right up to (the perception
of) phenomena (bhāva)?

If relative distinction (bheda) (between phases of perception and their

contents etc. is considered to be just) conceived (kalpyate), then this notion
(kalpanā) is not true (and real). (But if you say division is) solely due to their

effulgent (manifestation as such) (sphuraṇa), then the falling away
distinctions) (gālana) would also not be real.

(of

And that (falling away could not be brought about, even) with

innumerable thoughts (kalpa) and much action that is difficult to do. Nor (can

we say that consciousness does not possesses this dynamic) effulgence, for one
does not perceive that anything else possesses it.
Nor is there just non-existence (abhāvamātra). For if there were, it

would always be manifest. Therefore, be it reality (tattva) or its absence

(atattva), it would not be possible without phenomenal being (bhāva).
Manifestation (bhāna lit. ‘shining’) is dominated (vaśa) by the empire

of one’s own (consciousness), and so is the same for both what truly exists

(tattva) and what does not (atattva). (9-13ab)

hānopādānakalanātantre tv itthaṁ samarthanā || 13 ||
yathāsthitasya tasyātaḥ svarūpam upapadyate |
etatparijñānamayī jīvanmuktir nigadyate || 14 1I
Thus, the dependence (everyone experiences) on the ongoing
differentiation (kalanā) between giving up (some things and) adopting (others)
is explained in this way, so that the nature of its existence is logically possible in
such a way that a thorough knowledge of it constitutes liberation in this life
(jīvanmukti). (13cd-14)

APPENDIX I CHAPTER FOUR

ekaṁ svarūparūpaṁ hi meyamānapramātṛtaḥ |
sargāyvatārasaṅhāramayair ākramya vartate || 15 ||
svaṣvarūpānuguṇyena pratyekaṁ kalanāvaśāt |
sṛṣṭisthityādibhir bhedaiś caturdáhā api tāḥ sthitāḥ || 16 ||
kālagrāsāntam udayāc caturdhā vihito hi yaḥ |
tasya viśrāntir ekaiva tato devyas trayodaśa (devyātra-) |I 1T I|
anākhyacakraprādhānyāt (anyā-) pūjanīyatayā sthitāḥ |
tāsām antyā svaviśrāntir mahāvilayabhūḥ parā || 18 ||
(p. 50) sargāvatārasaṅṁhārāḥ kramātmāno vyavasthitāḥ |
anākhyam akramam api kramātmaiva tadāśrayāt |I 19 ||
The nature of the essential nature (svarūparūpa) (of consciousness) is

one. It abides having crossed over from the object, (the activity of the senses

that are) the means of knowledge and the perceiver, consisting of the creation
(sarga) (of outer objectivity), (its) persistence (avatāra) and withdrawal
(saṁhāra). (15).
Again, each one according to its nature also abides four-fold, due to the
relative distinctions between creation, persistence (withdrawal and the
inexplicable generated) by the process of differentiation (kalanā), which is
(analogously) considered to be four-fold, (beginning with) ‘emergence’ (udaya)

and ending with the Devouring of Tīime (kālagrāsa). (Thus, three times four
makes twelve phases). The state of repose of that (consciousness) is one, and so

the goddesses are thirteen."' (16-17).

They are the objects of worship because the Cycle of the Inexplicable

(anākhyacakra) (to which they belong) is the main one. Their final state of rest
within themselves is supreme, and is the Great Dissolution (mahāvilaya).
Creation (sarga), persistence (avatāra) and withdrawal (saṁhāra) are

processes; although the Inexplicable is not a process (akrama), in relation to
them (tadāśraya), it is itself the nature of the Krama (kramātmā). (18-19).

akramātmaparāmarśāt kramārūṣaṇarūpiṇaḥ (> kramāruhaṇa-) |
kālasya sahasāgrāsasaṅkramād ittham iṣyate (grā -) || 20 ||
yasmin yasmin hi viṣaye saṁkrāmanti marīcayaḥ |
tatra tatra hy anāyāsād anākhyasphuraṇaṁ sthitam || 21 ||
Time, which by its very nature is differentiated by succession, is

considered to be such (that is, the Inexplicable) by the transition (saṁkrama)

(into consciousness) brought about by (its sudden) forceful (sahasā)
assimilation. The flash of Anākhya is effortlessly present in whatever object of
sense the rays (of pure consciousness) penetrate (sarṁṅkrāmanti) (20-21).

udyoge nāvabhāsaś cet kathaṁ saktasya sambhave (> —vet) |
acarvito ‘vabhāsaḥ syāt tad amṛṣṭatayā katham || 22 ||
tatsargasthitisaṁhãārarūpe yo yaḥ kramaḥ sthitaḥ |

!" The four phases of the cycle of cognitive consciousness, the Inexplicable, are 1)

udaya (Emergence), 2) avabhāsa (Manifestation), 3) carvaṇa (Relish), 4) kālagrāsa
(Devouring of Time). These four are described together in 31-32ab, Relish in 26.

TANTRĀLOKA

tatra tatrākramatvena anākhyaṁ prathamaṁ sthitam || 23 ||

atrāntare ʻpi viśrāntiḥ kramākramapadojjhitā |
kālopādher anākramya nāntarīyatayā sthitā || 24 ||
If

no

manifestation

(avabhāsa)

(were

to

take

place)

when

(consciousness) exerts (itself, for that to happen,) how could that which adheres
(sakta) (to it) arise? Manifestation would not be relished (and analysed)
(carvita). (So) how could its state be that of reflective awareness?

Anākhya abides first (of all) as non-successive (akramatvena)
(consciousness), whatever be the process within the creation, persistence and
destruction of that (manifestation) (23).
The repose which is free of the planes of process (krama) and its
absence (akrama) here within (and between them), unaffected by the limiting

adjunct of time, does not abide as something separate from them (antarīyatayā).


no ced bhāvāntare saṅvit prasaret katham anyathā |
tadrūpamātrāvaṣṭambhāt paricchinnātmarūpataḥ || 25 ||
nīle tāvat sthitaṁ bhānaṁ bhānaṁ ca kila (tila) carvaṇe |
akrameṇa sthitaṁ no cen nīlasaṁvin na sidhyati || 26 ||
ādau nīlaṁ tato bhānaṁ tataś ca yadi carvaṇam |
anyonyaparihāreṇa nīlasaṁvin na tad bhavet || 27 ||
If that were not so, in what other way could consciousness extend
within phenomena? For it would be blocked within (a particular) form alone and

be (fundamentally) conditioned (paricchinna) by nature.
(The light of consciousness which is) manifestation (bhāna) abides in

this way (tāvar) within ‘blue’ and manifestation within the relish (carvaṇa) (of

it). If it were (also) not to persist devoid of succession (akrameṇa), a perception
of (even the colour) blue would not be possible (na siddhyati).

If, (in the course of perception of the colour blue,) blue initially, then
(its) manifestation (bhāna), and then (its) relish (carvaṇa) (were to take place,

with each phase) mutually exclusive from one another, the perception of blue
(nīlasaṁvid) would not be possible (27).

kālakramātmā kathitaḥ kramaś cānyonyavarjanāt |
naivaṁ kācit pratītiḥ syād vividhāṁśābhabhedataḥ || 28 ||
tan niraṁśavidãṁ bhogamayãnākhyānubhāvataḥ |
sarvãnubhavasaṁsṣiddhau lokayātrā pratiṣṭhitā || 29 ||
āmukhād bhāsamānaś ca kramo yo ʻyaṁ vyavasthitaḥ |
yathānubhavam etasya bhede ‘nākhyaṁ sphuṭaṁ sthitam 1| 30 ||
(That) is said to be a temporal process and succession, due to the mutual
exclusion (of the phases through which it passes). (However,) in this way, there
would not be any perception (prarīti) at all, for it would be divided into the

manifestation of (many) varied parts.

The daily life of those who know that (one consciousness), devoid of
parts, is established (pratiṣṭhitā) when all the ascertainment (anubhava) brought

APPENDIX I CHAPTER FOUR

about by the direct experience of the Inexplicable (anākhya), consisting of
worldly experience (bhoga), is completely accomplished (sarṁsiddhi).
This (cognitive) process manifesting from any particular thing (āmukha)
is deployed in accord with the ascertainment of its (nature). (In this way,) the
Inexplicable (anākhya) clearly abides within its division (bheda) (into subject,
object and means of knowledge, undergoing the four-fold process).
tatra meyasvarūpasya caturdhā bhedasambhavaḥ |
ādāv akalitollāsas tatsambhogas tataḥ param || 31 |I
tato 'pi carvaṇaṁ tatra virāmas tadanantaram |

evaṁ mānasvarūpe ‘pi caturdhā bhedasambhavaḥ || 32 I|
svaucityena parijñeyo mātṛrūpe tathaiva ca |
atra sarvatra viśrāntir ekaiva nirupādhikā || 33 ||
āsāṁ dvādaśadevīnāṁ parāmarśabalāt sphuṭam |

vikalpavāsanāśūnyaṁ nirvikalpaṁ pravartate || 34 ||

ye tu yoṣidvyasaninas tanmukhenaiva te kramāt |
kālagrāsapade samyak praviśanti nirāśraye || 35 ||

There, the divisions pertaining to objectivity (meyasvarūpa) arise fourfold. First comes an undifferentiated outpouring (of consciousness)
(akalitollāsa). After that comes its enjoyment (sambhoga). Then also (its) relish
(carvaṇa), and after that, repose (virāma) there. (31-32ab)
In the same way, the divisions pertaining to the means of knowledge
(mānaṣvarūpa)

arise

four-fold.

One

should

know

(that

it takes

place)

analogously within subjectivity (nātṛrūpa) in accord with (its nature). Here in
all cases, repose (viśrānti) is one and devoid of limiting adjuncts. (32cd-33)
(Consciousness,) devoid of discursive representation (nirvikalpa),
clearly arises free of (even) the latent traces of thought constructs (vikalpa) by

the power of reflection (parāmarśabala) on these twelve goddesses,
By means of that, those who are addicted to women progressively
(kramāt) enter properly into the plane within which time is consumed (into
consciousness) and is free of (outer objective) support.

kecid darśanamātreṇa tathāṅgasparśanāt pare |
dvīndriyotpattitaś cānye viśrāmyanti nirāśraye || 36 ||
itthaṁ yoṣidvyasanināṁ tiṣro ʻnubhavabhūmikāḥ |

dr̥śyante kālavilaye viśrāntir nīrupādhikā || 37 I|

sr̥ṣṭyasr̥ṣṭyādibhedena (sṛṣṭi-) catasro ‘nākhyadevatāḥ |
prameyabhūmim āśritya kālagrāsaparāḥ sthitāḥ || 38 I|
Some rest within (pure consciousness) devoid of the support (of

objectivity) by just seeing (a woman), others in the same way by touching (her)
limbs, and in the case of others, it is brought about by the two senses.

In this way, those addicted to women perceive three planes of
realisation (anubhava), and when time dissolves away, (they experience)
unconditioned rest.
As the division into the creation of creation (the persistence of creation)

and so on, the Anākhya deities are four who, having taken up (their place on)
the plane of objectivity, abide intent on consuming time (kālagrāsa).

TANTRĀLOKA

kṣepārthasya kaler dhātor anvarthānugamāt sphuṭam |
kālīśabdaś catasṛṇāṁ devīnāṁ vācakaḥ sthitaḥ || 39 l|

kṣepo bahirmukhecchātmayoṣitsambhogajanmani |
pravṛttes tāstamyādivaśāt (> tāratamyādi-) kālagrāsaḥ (-mayaḥ) sthitaḥ || 40 ||
The word ‘Kālī’ denotes the four Goddesses clearly, in accord with the

meaning of the root kal in the sense of ‘casting forth’ (kṣepa).

Casting forth into incipient (janman) sexual enjoyment with a woman
who is (the very) nature of extroverted desire which, by its progressively
(developing) engagement, is the devouring of time (kālagrāsa).
evaṁ madyavyasanino ye kecij jantavaḥ sthitāḥ |
teṣāṁ tadāśrayeṇaiva kālagrāso ‘bhidhīyate || 41 |I
tasyāpi darśanasparśapānayogavataḥ (-tā) sphuṭam |
udrekātkarṣato (> udrekot-) dṛṣṭaḥ kālagrāsasya sambhavaḥ || 42 II
praviṣṭe ʻntaḥ śīdhurase (-saṁ) bhedanirharaṇātmake |

sthairyam eti camatkāro vinā viṣayasaṅgatim || 43 ||

pratibimbamahābhogamadhyabhūmivikāsataḥ |
pramāṇabhūmim āśritya catasraḥ kālikāḥ sthitāḥ || 44 ||
śabdasaṅkhyānavṛtteś ca kaler dhātoḥ kilārthataḥ |
sthitisṛṣṭyādibhedena caturdhā kālikodayaḥ || 45 1|
Similarly, some people are addicted to wine. (Now) will be taught how
they consume time (kālagrāsa) by taking that as their support.
Time is clearly seen to be consumed for one who is (engaged in) the
Yoga of seeing, touching and drinking (wine), by virtue of the excellence of (its)
superabundant intensity (udreka).
Once having entered within (the essentially conscious nature,) the rum
that eliminates duality, (the yogic) state of wonder (camatkāra), becomes firm

without (needing to) associate with (outer) objects, (for it happens just) by the
expansion of the Middle Plane (consciousness) of the Great Enjoyment of the

reflection'" (of the Goddess within it). (43-44ab)

Once having entered the plane of the means of knowledge (pramāṇa)

(i.e. the senses and mind), there are four Kālikās. In accord with the meaning of

the root kal, in the sense of the activity of ‘resounding’ (śabda) and
‘enumeration’ (saṇkhāyana), the Kālikās arise four-fold, divided into the
emanation of persistence (the persistence of persistence) and so on. (44-45)

evaṁ māṁsavyasanīnām antarāsvādabhūminām |

pramātrṛrīpam āviśya catasraḥ kālikāḥ sthitāḥ || 46 ||

gatārthasya (> gatyā-) kaler dhātor arthasyānugamādimāḥ |
darśanasparśasambhogavirāmodrekatā matāḥ || 47 ||
saṁhārasr̥ṣṭyādīmayaś caturdhāyaṁ kramaḥ sthitaḥ |
strīmadyamāṁsabhogeṣu camatkārānuvṛttitaḥ || 48 ||
"' The twelve Kaālīs are all reflections (pratibimba) of the thirteenth Kālī, which is the

original image (bimba) in the centre.

'! Cf. TĀ 4/173cd-175. This analysis indicates that the author had seen the Tantrāloka.

APPENDIX I CHAPTER FOUR

kālagrāso vyasanināṁ kañcit kālaṁ sphuṭaṁ sthitaḥ (-tam) |

etatparikaras tv anyo bhāvavargo vyavasthitaḥ || 49 ||

yuktyānayaiva tatrāpi kālagrāsamayī sthitiḥ |
anenaivāśayenaiva parabrahmopalabdhaye || 50 ||

In the same way, (another) four Kālikās (are activated,) once having

entered the subjectivity of those who are addicted to meat and are on the plane

of inner taste (āsvāda).
In accord with the sense of the root ‘kal’” as ‘activityʼ (gati), there are

considered to be (four) states of intensity (udrekatā) (occasioned by) the sight
(darśana), touch (sparśa), and enjoyment (saṁbhoga) (of meat, along with) the
cessation (virāma) (in which one rests satisfied once it has been consumed).
This sequence is four-fold, as the emanation of withdrawal (persistence
of withdrawal) and so on, in accord with the wonder (experienced when)

enjoying (making love to) a woman, (drinking) wine, and (eating) meat.

(The state in which) time is consumed that those who are addicted (to

these things experience) continues for some time in a clearly apparent way, and
the other states of being (bhāva) abide in attendance to it.
By this very same practice (yukti), the state (sthiti) in which time is
consumed (kālagrāsa) obtains there also, and by this same intention (āśaya),
(serves) to realise the supreme Brahman.

lalanāmadhumāṁsāni pūjyāgrāṇi viśeṣataḥ |
tad itthaṁ sarvabhãāvãnãṁ sarvãnubhavabhũmiṣu l| 51 ||
(p. 53) mahārthadṛṣṭyā sugamaḥ kālagrāso ʻpy ayatnataḥ |
samyagvastuvicāreṇa (samyaga-) bhāvānām āsvabhāvataḥ (> svasva-) || 52 |I
labdhabodhodayānandaṁ (-bodho -) vande saṁṣthānam ātmanaḥ |

iti siddhamukhāmnāyayuktyā naivāsti vastutaḥ || 53 1|
vastuṣvabhāvo yatrāyaṁ kālaḥ syāt kalanātmakaḥ |
svaviṣphāramayaṁ (> svavisphāra-) sarvam idaṁ saṁṣthānam ātmanaḥ || 54 |
iti bodhodayānandāt kaḥ kālo grasyate hi yaḥ |
tadgrāsasaṁrambhaparã yãś ca dvãdaśa kãlikãḥ || 55 1|
(This can be done) in particular with the most excellent objects of

worship, that is, a female partner (lalanā), wine and meat, and in the same way
with all phenomena on all planes of experience.

According to the Mahārtha view, time is easily and effortlessly
consumed (kālagrāsa) by correctly reflecting on the nature of reality
(vastuvicāra) as the essential nature of phenomena.

‘I praise the ground (saṁsṣthāna) of the Self, which is the bliss of the
dawning of awakened consciousness attained’ — according to this teaching

(transmitted through) the oral tradition of the Siddhas (siddhamukhāmnāya); in
actual fact, time does not differentiate the essential nature of an entity.

(In reality,) all this ground of the Self is the expansion of one’s own

nature (svavisphāra). Thus, what is (the nature of) the time consumed by the

bliss of the dawning of awakened consciousness, that the twelve Kālikās are
engaged in the act of (its) assimilation?

itthaṁ vicāryamāṇānāṁ na kiñcid iti niścayāt |

TANTRĀLOKA

ekaiva cidacidbhogabhoganirbhogalakṣaṇā (cidacidbhogā-) || 56 |

viśrāntiḥ paramā devī kālopādhivivarjitā |
savikalpāvikalpānāṁ sarvāsā (> sarveṣāṁ) saṁvidālayaḥ || 57 |
kramākramapadottīrṇā (kramāt-) tadābhogātmikāpi yā |
acalā spandarahitā sarvaspandopabhoginī || 58 II

Reflecting upon them in this way, (one realises that time) is nothing at
all. Thus, as this is the ascertained teaching (iti niścayāt), there (can) only be

just one state of rest (viśrānti), which is (both) consciousness and its absence,

worldly experience (bhoga) and its absence, as well as (transcendence) devoid

of (all worldly) experience (nirbhoga). (And that state of rest) is the supreme

Goddess, who is devoid of the limiting adjunct of time and is the abode which is

consciousness (sarṁvidālaya) of all (perceptions), be they accompanied by

thought constructs or without. Beyond the planes of process and its absence,

although she is also its blissful expanse (ābhoga), (She is) immobile, without

pulsation (spanda), and
consciousness). (56-58)

(yet)

enjoys

all

the

pulsations

(of universal

pratyakṣabhūtā sarvasyāpy adyāpi vividhair mukhaiḥ |

tathā pūjanasaṅkrāmair upāyair upalakṣitā l| 59 ||

āsāṁ dvādaśadevīnāṁ svarūpavilayāvaniḥ |

trayodaśīti yā devī kathyate hy upacārataḥ || 6O II

upādeyatayā saiva paropāsyatayā sthitā |
trayodaśīnāṁ devīnāṁ svaucityārthānusārataḥ |
abhidhānāni (-nni) vartante hṛdayaṅgamayuktitaḥ l| 61 |I
etāsām abhidhānena yā mantrākṣaramālikāḥ |
kālikākramadrṛṣṭatvād upacāreṇa tāḥ sthitāḥ || 62 |I
She is the direct perception (pratyakṣabhiūtā) of everything (taking
place) now also through many kinds of channels (mnukha). She is experienced

(upalakṣitā) in this way through the (many) means (to realisation), which are

(forms of) worship (pūjana), and transference (saṇkrāma) (of enlightened
consciousness).
The ground of the merger of these twelve goddesses into their own

essential nature is said, in a manner of speaking, to be the thirteenth goddess.

She alone is to be realised (upādeya) and is the supreme object of worship. (60-

61ab)

The names of the thirteen goddesses are in consonance with their own
corresponding (nature, which is their) meaning (artha), (and are such) so that
they may be taken to heart.
They abide in a secondary sense as the garlands of the syllables of the
Mantras (formed) by naming them, because (they) are perceived as the

procession (krama) of Kālikās (rather than phases of perception).

p. 54) melāpadarśane (melāva-) hy atra pratyakṣajñānagocare |

kathaṁ mantrasya sadbhãvaḥ sa pratyakṣo ʻpi vā katham || 63 II
avarṇarājapratyakṣaḥ kāyānubhavabhūmikaḥ |

pañcapiṇḍātmako ʻpi syāt sūkṣmapratyakṣadarśinaḥ || 64 |I
nānyāni mantravarṇāni pratyakṣānīva sarvathā |

APPENDIX I CHAPTER FOUR

upacāreṇa tadvṛtti (> -vṛttiḥ) kālikākramagocarā |I 65 ||
(One may ask at this point,) what is the essential nature of Mantra here,
according to the teaching concerning the union (of Siddhas and Yoginīs)
(melāpadarśana)? Or (one may ask), how is it directly apparent (to the senses)?
The direct perception of the letter A, who is the king (of all the phonemes,) is on
the plane of corporeal experience, and so too of the Five-Lettered (Syllable)
(KHPHREṀ) (pañcapiṇḍa), of those who perceive by means of a subtle, direct
perception. No other letters of Mantra are as directly perceived in all respects (as
these are). It is metaphorically (said) that their functional state (vṛtti) is in the
field of the procession (krama) of the Kālikās. (63-65)
tattadvikalpasambhũtavãsanãvedhasaṁkṣayãt |
sarvākāṅkṣāvirahitā viśrāntir jāyate parā ll 66 ||
ittham utthānaviṣaye bhāvānubhavabhūmiṣu |
pratyakṣaḥ sarvajantūnāṁ sthito “sau (sthito ) pūjanakramaḥ || 67 I|
anyair āvarakatvena ye bhāvāḥ parivarjitāḥ |
tair eva jñānīnām itthaṁ jājvalīti parā citiḥ || 68 II
The supreme state of rest, free of all craving, arises by virtue of the

cessation of the penetration (into individual consciousness) of the latent (traces)

generated by each thought construct. This liturgy (pājanakrama) is directly
perceivable to all people in this way on the planes of the experience of
phenomenal existence (bhāva) within the field (of the activity of the senses

operating when) risen from (deep contemplation). Devoid of the phenomenal
states (bhāva) that serve as obscuring coverings, brought about by those other
(kinds of thought constructs), the supreme consciousness of the men of
knowledge burns intensely. (66-68)

Appendix J

to Chapter Four

Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī Vidyās

The
following
Mantras
are
drawn
from
the
Kālīkulapañcakramakramārcana. The mantras of the thirteen Kālīs are also

found in the Kramasadbhāva, which may well have been their original source.

The colophons of the Kālīkulapañcakramakramārcana tell uṣ that it was

compilled by Prabodhanātha who was a priest in the well known Paśupatinātha
temple in Kathmandu in the 12 century.

Piṇḍanātha Saṁhārabīja
khphreṅṁ/ ma-e-kha-pha-raṁ
Nine syllable Vidyā
khphreṁ mahācaṇḍayogeśvari
Seventeen syllable Vidyā
hrīñ mahācaṇḍayogeśvari thṛ dhr ṭhṛphaṭ phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ
Seventeen syllable Vidyā
khphreṁ phāṁ phīṁ mahãcaṇḍayogeśvari kālakāli hūṁ phaṭ

100 syllable Samayavidyā
khphreṁ phat | mahācaṇḍe caṇḍamukhi caṇḍayogeśvari phaṭ | caṇḍaduḥkhavimocani sarvasamayalopavighātani tejovati (tejomayi) amṛtamūrte asiddhasādhani siddhiṛddhiprade nāśaya sarvadoṣān abhimataṁ me prayaccha sarve

sarvage arūpe sarvarūpe hrīṁ phat | khphreṁ phaṭ | hūṁ kroṁ kṣāṁ sarvavidyeśvari phaṭ svāhā |

The Thirteen Kālīs
khphreṁ āṁ phāṁ phĩṁ mahãsr̥ṣṭikãli kãlagrasanakãli ambãpãdanamaḥl 1 |
khphreṁ āṁ phāṁ phīṁ mahãsthitikãli kãlagrasanakãli ambãpãda namaḥ ||
Nw

khphreṁ āṁ phāṁ phũṁ mahãsaṁhãrakãli kãlagrasanakãli ambãpãda namaḥ
I| 3 I NW

khphreṁ āṁ phāṁ phũṁ mahãraktakãli kãlagrasanakãli ambãpãda namaḥ l|

w

khphreṁ āṁ phāṁ phīṁ mahāsukāli kālagrasanakāli ambāpāda namaḥ l| 5
SW

APPENDIX I CHAPTER FOUR

khphreṁ āṁ phāṁ phīṁ mahāyamakāli kālagrasanakāli ambāpāda namaḥ l|
6 I| SW
khphreṁ āṅṁ phāṁ phīṁmahãmr̥tyukãli kãlagrasanakãli ambãpãda namaḥ |IT | S
khphreṁ āṁ phāṁ phīṁ mahābhadrakāli kālagrasanakāli ambāpāda
namaḥ
|| 8 I|| SE
khphreṁ āṁ phāṁ phīṁ mahāparamārkakāli kālagrasanakāli ambāpāda
namaḥ || 9 I| SE
khpreṁ āṁ phāṁ phīṁ māhāmārtaṇḍakāli kālagrasanakāli ambāpāda namaḥ ll
lIOI E
khphreṁ āṁ phāṁ phīṁ mahākālāgnirudrakāli kālagrasanakāli ambāpāda
namaḥ |lI 11 I|NE
khphreṁ āṅṁ phāṁ phīṁ mahākālakāli kālagrasanakāli ambāpāda namaḥ ||
12 I| Front of NE
khphreṁ āṁ phāṁ phīṁ mahãghoracaṇḍabhairṟavikãli kãligrasanakãli
ambāpāda namaḥ | 13 I| Middle

etā raktavarṇā dvādaśārapadmasthā nīlotpaladalaśyāmāḥ |
caturbhujā varatriśūlapadmakādyadharāḥ|raśmirūpā gale
muṇḍamālopaśobhitāḥl| śuṣkāḥ saptakapālaśiromālādharāḥ

piṅgordhvakeśanāgabandhamaulicandrārdhabhūṣitāḥ ||

vyāghracarmanivasanāḥ || gauraśavārūḍhāḥ || idṛgrūpaṁ
pīṭhaniketanādi saṁhārakramaparyantaṁ devadevīnāṁ ca
bodhavyaṁ ||
These (Kālīs) are red and are located on a lotus of twelve petals. They

are dark blue (like) the petals of a blue (night lotus). They have four

arms and bear a wish- bestowing gesture, trident, lotus and a skull bowl.

They are rays (of the Kaālī in the centre) and (their) neck is adorned with a

garland of severed heads. Emaciated, they wear tiaras of seven skulls. Their

reddish-brown hair is tied up in a knot by snakes and is adorned with a
half-moon as its crest jewel. Their anklets bear Kaula heroes as their bells and,

(their body) adorned with a network of little bells, they have three eyes, wear

tiger skins and are mounted on white corpses. One should know that such is
the form of the goddesses of the gods (everywhere) beginning with (the
goddesses) in the locations of the sacred seats right up to (those populating) the

process of withdrawal.

dvādaśaiva saṁcintya madhye bhagavatīṁ kr̥śodarīṁ pīnonnatapayodharāṁ
karṇāntāyatamadavighūrṇitadhyānalocanāṁ varadābhayakarāṁ dhyātvā
trayodaśamantreṇaūrdhvasiṁhānanaṁ yaṣṭvādevīṁ pūjayet|l

TANTRĀLOKA

Once reflected on the twelve (Kālīs), (next visualize) the goddess in the
center. She is Kṛśodaṁī (Narrow Waist). Her breasts are fat and upraised and her

4 Mahāraktakālī
3 Mahāsaṁhārakālī

Ww

S Mahāsukālī

Sw

6 Mahāyamakālī

13 Mahāghoracaṇḍabhairavakālī

SE

8 Mahābhadrakālī

12 Mahākālakālī

11 Mahākālāgnirudrakālī

E

9 Mahāparamáārkakālī

eyes, extending to her ears, are (immersed) in meditation and rolling with
inebriation. (Her two hands make) gestures of granting boons and (bestowing)
fearlessness. Having meditated (on her in this way) and having worshipped (her)
upper lion face with the thirteenth Mantra, one should worship the goddess.


ĀHNIKA 5
============================================================

CHAPTER SIX
--------------------------------------------------

The Temporal Means (kālopāya)
The Formation of Places and the Path of Time in the Flow of the Vital Breath,
verses 1-6, pages 214-220
Time, the Origin of the Breath and the Goddess Kālī, verses 7-13, pages 220-

Consciousness Vitalizes the Body Through the Breath, verses 14-22ab, pages

230-237

Tying the Topknot, verses 22cd-28cd, pages 238-248
The Sixfold Path in the Breath, verses 28cd-36, pages 248-250
Three Kinds of Terms, verses 31cd-33, pages 250-253
Time and the Path of Time, verses 37-45, pages 253-259
The Measure of the Movement of the Vital Breath (cāramāna)

The Eight Kinds of Movement of the Breath, verses 46cd-51ab, pages 259262
The Perceptible Flow of the Breath from the Heart to the End of the Twelve
The Energies of the Lord, the Self and the Vital Breath, verses 51cd-54,
pages 263-265
The Impelling Force of the Vital Breath, verses 55, pages 265-267
Vāmā, Jyeṣṭhā and Raudrī, verses 56-59, pages 267-269

The Movement of the Breath (uccāra), verses 60-62, pages 269-272

The Projection of Night and Day, the Transits (of the Sun) and the Planets,

verses 63-66ab, pages 272-277
The Projection of the Planets, Constellations and Serpent Gods, verses 66cd-75,
pages 277-301
A Lunar Month, verses 76-77ab, pages 301-303
The Procession of Night and Day, verses 77cd-92ab. Pages 303-315

The Lunar Month, verses 92cd-95 (92cd-95ab), pages 315-318
The New Moon, verses 96-100ab (96-99), pages 318-325

The Solar Eclipse, verses 100cd-109ab (100-108), pages 325-335
The Lunar Eclipse, verses 109cd-114ab (112-113), pages 335-340
The Projection of the Year into the Breath
The Signs of the Zodiac, verses 114cd-123 (114-123ab), pages 340-349
The Twelve-Year Cycle, verses 124-126ab (123cd-125). pages 350-351
The Cycle of Sixty Years, verses 126cd-130ab (126-129), pages 351-358

The Varieties of Reabsorptions (of the Breath into Consciousness)
(saṁhāracitratā)

The Cycles of Time in the Outer World

Human Measures of Time, verses 130cd-134 (130-134ab), pages 358-360

The Lifespans of the Gods
The Egg of Brahmā, verses 135-140 (134cd-140ab), pages 360-363
The Night and Day of Brahmā, verses 141-147ab (140cd-146), pages 363-

The Lifespans of the Lords of the Worlds and Cosmic Cycles up to Śiva,
verses 147cd-179 (147-179ab), pages 368-391

viii
Conclusion: Time Within the Breath and Immersed in the States of
Consciousness, verses 180-185 (179cd-185ab), pages 391-394
Time in the other Vital Breaths

Apāna — Inhalation, verses 186-195 (185cd-195ab), pages 394-397

The Śix Causal Deities in the Body, verses 189-193 (188cd-193ab), pages

397-401

The Lower Mouth, verses 194-195 (193cd-195ab), pages 401-402
Samāna — the Equalizing Breath, verses 196-199 (195cd-199ab), pages 402-

The Circulation (sarcāra) of the Equalizing Breath and the Equinoxes
(viṣuvat), verses 200-208 (199cd-208ab), pages 410-420
Conclusion of the Projections of the Cycles of Time in the Equalizing
Breath, verses (209-211) (208cd-211ab), pages 420-421

Udāna — the Ascending Breath, verses 212-214ab (211cd-213), pages 421422
Vyāna — the Pervasive Breath, verses 214cd-216ab (214-215), pages 423-

The Supreme, Subtle and Gross Emergence of the Phonemes (varṇodaya),
verses 216cd-217ab (216), page 424

The Supreme Emergence of the Phonemes as Unstruck Sound, verses 217cd219ab (217-218), page 425
The Inferior Supreme Emergence of the Letters ~ The Flux of the Phonemes,
verses 219cd-224ab (219-223), pages 425-428
The Subtle Emergence of the Letters, verses 224cd (224ab), page 428

The Subtle-Subtle Emergence of the Letters, verses 225 (224cd-225ab), pages

428-429

The Subtle-Gross Emergence of the Letters, verses 226-227 (225cd-227cd),

pages 429-430
The Vyomavyāpin Mantra, verses 228-230 (227cd-230ab), pages 431-437
The Supreme Emergence of the Phonemes in the Breath, verses 231-238ab
(230ab-237), pages 437-442
The Supreme Subtle Emergence of the Phonemes, verses 238cd-240ab (238239), pages 442-443
The Gross Emergence of the Letters in the Breath, verses 240cd-241ab (240),

pages 443-449

Appendix to Volume Four
Appendix to Chapter Six: The Cycles of Time in the Cycle of the Breath by
Freedom Cole, pages 450-532

Abbreviations
Ajaḍapramātrṣiddhi

Asiatic Society of Bengal

Atharvaveda

Bodleian Library, Oxford

Brahmayāmala
Bhagavadgītā
Bhogakārikā
B,rhadāraṇyakopaṇiṣad
Chandogyopaṇiṣad
Ciñcinīmatasārasamuccaya
Dharmālaṅkārakārikā
Devīdyvardhaśatikā

Devīpañcaśatāka

Dhvanyālokālocana
Government Oriental Manuscript Library, University of
Chennai
History of Dharmaśāstra
Indo-Iranian Journal
Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivṛtivimarśinī
Institut Français dTndologie de Pondichéry

Iṣstituto Studi Medio ed Estremo Oriente

Iśānaśivagurudevapaddhati

KSTS
KNP
LYV

MBh
MP

MP (1 Śk)

MP (2 Tri)
Trivendrum.
MP (3 AS)
MS

Journal Asiatique
Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bombay
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society
Jayadrathayāmala
Kashmiri Series Edition
Kaulajñānanīrṇaya
Kramanayapradīpikā
Kumārikākhaṇḍa of the Manthānabhairavatantra
Kulapañcaśikā
Khacakrapañcakastotra
Kubjikāmata
Kashmiri Shaivism, the Secret Supreme
Kashmiri Series of Texts and Studies
Kramanayapradīpikā
Laghuyogavāsiṣṭa
Mātaṅgaparameśvarāgama
Mahābhārata
Mahānayaprakāśa
Mahāṇayaprakāśa commented by Śitikaṇṭha
Mahānayaprakāśa by unknown author published in
Mahānayaprakāśa by Arṇasiṁha
Manuscript

Maālinīvijayottaratantra
Mālinīvijayavārtika
Monier-Williams
Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad
Mṛgendratantra
Mṛgendratantravr̥tti Kriyāpāda
Mṛgendratantra Kriyāpāda
Mṛgendratantra Vidyāpāda
Nepal German Manuscript Preservation Project

Nyāyabindu
Nyāyabinduṭīkā

Netratantra
Netratantroddyota
Number
Page

Paramokṣanirāsakārikā

(= Parātriṁśika)

kavivaraṇa (Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa)

Pānini’s Sūtras, the Aṣṭādhyāyī.
Pūrvakāmikā
Paramārthasāra
Pramāṇavārtika
Pramāṇaviniścaya

Pratyabhijñāhṛdaya
Ricerche e Studi Orientali
Rājataraṅginī
Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha
Rgveda
SŚatapathabrāhmaṇa

Sarvajñānottara

Sva/ŚSubodhodayamañjarī
Swami Laksmanjoo
Science of Light

Saṁvitprakāśa

Spandakārikā

Spandanirṇaya

Spandapradīpikā
Spandasaṁdoha

Śivasūtra

Śivasūtravimarśinī
ivastotrāvali

Śrīmatottara

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad
Satsahasrasaṁhitā

xi

SSP

SVT
SvTu

SUNY
SYM
TTP

TC

TSRP
TSa

TS

TU

TUp

TVDh
TBh

ŪKau

VBh
VM

YV

YG
Up
u

comm.

Somaśambhupaddhati
Svacchandatantra
Svacchandatantroddyota
Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha

State University of New York Press

Siddhayogeśvarīmata
Tattvatrayaparīkṣā
Tantrāloka
Tattvārthacintāmaṇi

Trika Śāstra Rahasya Prakriyā
Tantrasāra
Tantrasadbhāva
Tantroccaya

Taittirīyopaniṣad
Tantravaṭadhānikā
Triśirobhairava

Ūrmikaulāraṇvatantra
Vijñāṅabhairava
Vāmakeśvarīmata

Vātulanāthasūtra
Yogavāsiṣṭa

Yonigahvaratantra
Upaniṣad
laghu

guru
Commentary


ĀHNIKA 6
============================================================

CHAPTER FIVE
--------------------------------------------------


The Individual Means (āṉṇavopāya)
Rudra, who by the awesome, resounding sound of His utterance (of

Mantras) instils fear in all the universe, intent on the contemplation of His own
abode and unconquered, is victorious.
Now the occasion has come; in order to describe the Individual Means,

he begins with the second half (of the verse begun at the end of the previous
chapter).

āṇavena vidhinā paradhāma prepsatām atha nirūpyata etat || 1 ||
For the sake of those who aspire to realise the Supreme Abode by
the practice (vidhi) of the Individual Means, that is (now) going to be
described.
‘The practice’ consists (of the various forms of) utterance (of Mantra,
the vital breath and consciousness) and the rest. ‘That’, namely, the Individual
Means, which is going to be explained (in this chapter).
' Āṇavopāya — the Individual Means — is the category of practice that comprises the

grossest, most objective, bodily based means; nonetheless, like the other categories of
means, it culminates in the realisation of the oneness of Anuttara, which according to
Abhinava, is taught only in the Trika tradition, and is ultimately attainable only through

its teachings. There is no difference in the fruits of Trika practice in any of these means,

whether ‘higher” or lower’. The gradation depends on the degree of purity of
consciousness, that is, on the presence or absence of thought constructs (vikalpa), which
in turn depends upon the degree of objectivity with which subjective consciousness is

engaged. In this chapter, Abhinava presents examples, one by one, of the varieties of
practice listed in the MV (2/21) as belonging to the Individual Means (see above 1/170
and 214-233ab). For the convenience of the reader, here is that passage again:
‘The penetration that takes place by (the practice) of the utterance (of Mantra

and upward movement of the vital breath) (uccāra), the instruments (of Yoga) (karaṇa),
visualization (dhyāna), the letters (varṇa) (as the subtle practice of Mantra), and the
formation of place (sthānakalpanā) (to make offerings and on which to concentrate) is
rightly said to be Individual (āṇava).
Although said to belong to the lowest category of means, their elevation
appears to be very surprising. But this is not really so. The category of practice to which

a means to realisation belongs is determined by where it begins. It may develop in

stages through the higher categories or reach its goal directly. Abhinava, as always, is

optimistic that the aspirant will receive abundant grace and progress quickly. Those who

do not will benefit anyway by contemplating these higher states by cultivating creative
contemplation (bhāvanā).


ĀHNIKA 7
============================================================

CHAPTER EIGHT
--------------------------------------------------

The Path of Space (deśādhavan)

The Path of Space Established in the Body and Pervasive Consciousness,
verses 2-8, pages 49-57

The Five Causes According to the Dīkṣortara, verses 9-11, pages 57-62
The Root, Middle and Summit of Consciousness According to the

Triśirobhairava, verses 12-15ab, pages 62-66
Identifying with Bhairava by Oneness with the Path, verses 15cd-19ab,
pages 66-68
The Worlds within the Earth Principle and the Egg of Brahmā
The Worlds in the Lower Half of the Egg of Brahmā, verses 19cd-

42ab, pages 68-97

Ananta in the Boat on the Cosmic Waters Below the Egg of

Brahmā, verses 20cd-22ab, pages 69-78
The Worlds Within the Egg of Brahmā

The World of the Fire of Time, verses 22cd-24ab, pages 78-80

vii

The Thirty-five Hells of Avīci, Kumbhīpāka and Mahāraurava, verses
24cd-30ab, pages 80-87
The Eight Netherworlds (pātāla), verses 30cd-42ab, pages 87-97
Śrīkaṇṭha as Hāṭakeśvara, Guardian of the Netherworlds, verses 31cd35ab, pages 89-93
The Upper Half of the Egg, verse 42cd, page 97
Mount Meru and the Surrounding Lands and Mountains, verses 43cd-

45ab, pages 97-100
The Cities Surrounding Meru, verses 45cd-58ab, pages 100-109
The Four Mountains Surrounding Mount Meru, verses 58cd-62ab, pages
109-111

The Forests, Lakes and Trees on the Mountains, verses 60cd-62ab, pages 110-111

Jambudvīpa and its Nine Principal Regions, verses 62cd-63ab, page 111

The Nine Mountain Chains around Meru, verses 63cd-67, pages 111-117

The Regions around Meru, verses 68-79, pages 117-127
Ilāvṛta, verse 68, pages 117-118
West of Meru: Ketumāla and its Seven Mountains — West of
Gandhamādana, verse 69, pages 119

East of Meru: Bhadrāśva with five mountains — east of Mālyavat,

verses 70-71, pages 119-121
North of Meru: The Land of Kuru, verses 72-73, pages 121-123

North of Meru: Hiraṇyamaya, verse 74, page 124
North of Meru: Ramyaka, verse 75, page 124

South of Meru: Hari, verse 76, page 125
South of Meru: The Land of the Kinnaras and Bhārata, verses 77-

79, pages 125-127
The Land of Bhārata, verses 80-83, pages 128-132
The Nine Regions of Bhārata, verse 84, page 132

The Seven Mountains, Six Islands and Inhabitants of Kumārikā, verses

85-92, pages 132-140
Rulers of the Lands of Jambūdvīpa, verses 93-96, pages 140-141

The Ocean of Salt and the Twelve Mountains around Jambūdvīpa, verses

97-98, pages 142-143

Mount Vidyutvat, verses 99-101, pages 143-144

Six Islands and Seas beyond Jambūdvīpa and the Ocean of Salt, verses
102-107ab (102-106), pages 144-150

Mount Lokāloka: The Land of Gold and the Rudras of the Eight

Directions Around Mount Lokāloka, verses 107cd-109ab (107-

108), pages 150-152

Ajavīthī and Suvithī, the Paths of the Fathers and the Gods, verses 109cd-

110ab (109), pages 152-154
The Rising and Setting of the Sun in Lokāloka and the Lands

around Meru, verses 110cd-113ab (110ab-112), pages 155-158

vil1

Beyond Lokāloka: a Region of Darkness and the Ocean of Garbhoda,
verses 113cd-115ab (113-114), pages 158-159

Geography of Kauśeya on the Shore of Garbhoda According to the
Siddhayogeśvarī-mata, verses
115cd-118ab (115-117), pages 159-160
The Seven Lokas
1) The Earth World (Bhūrloka), verses 118cd-121ab (118-120),
pages 161-162

2) Bhuvarloka the Atmospheric World and the Paths of the Wind,
verses 121cd-142 (121-143ab), pages 162-177
3) Svarloka, verses 144-149ab (143cd-148), pages 177-181

4) Maharloka (the Great World), verses 149cd-151 (149-151ab),

pages 182-186
5) Janaloka (the World of People) and 6) Tapoloka (the World of
Austerities), verses (152-154ab) (151cd-153ab), pages 182-186
7) Satyaloka (the World of Truth), verses 154cd-155ab (153cd-

154), pages 182-186

The Worlds of Brahmā and Viṣṇu, verses 155cd-158 (155-157ab), pages

182-186

Rudra’s World, verses 158-162ab (157cd-161), pages 187-190
Elements Gross and Subtle From Which the Egg is Fashioned, verses
162cd-165ab (162-164), pages 190-192
Measurements of the Egg of Brahmā, verses 165cd-167 (165-167ab),

pages 193-194
The Hundred Rudras, verses 168 (167cd-168ab), pages 194-196

The Nature of the Egg of Brahmā, verses 169-179 (168cd-179ab), pages

197-203
The Eleven Rudras Governing the Hundred Rudras, verses 180-184ab
(179cd-183), pages 204-206
The Hundred Eggs According to the Siddhātantra, verses 184cd-186ab
(184-185), pages 207-208

The Sizes of the Principles from Water to Śiva as stages to liberation,
verses 186cd-193 (186-193ab), pages 208-216

The Worlds of Water and the Other Elements

The World of Bhadrakālī, verses 194-196 (193cd-196ab), pages
217-219
The World of Vīrabhadra, verses 197-199 (196cd-199ab), pages

219-221

The Thirteen Worlds between Bhadrakālī and Vīrabhadra, verses
200-205ab (199cd-204), pages 221-234
The Worlds of the Principles of Fire, Air and Space, verses
205cd-209 (205-209ab), pages 234-237
The Fate of Śaivites after Death, verses 210-215ab (209cd-214), pages

237-239

The Subtle Body
The Spheres of the Subtle Elements and The Eight Bodies of
Śiva, verses 215cd-221ab (215-220), pages 239-243
The Deities of the Organs of Action and Knowledge, verses (221cd223ab) (221-222), pages 243-245

The Worlds of Manas and the Intellect
The Moon, the Sphere of Manas, verses (223cd-225ab) (223-224),
pages 245-247

The Worlds of the Rudras of the Ego and the Eight Beings of the

Intellect, verses (225cd-228ab) (225-227), pages 247-248

The Five Groups of Eight Rudras in the Intellect and Fundamental
Nature, verses 228cd-238ab (228-237), pages 248-256
The Worlds of Umā and Śrīkaṇṭha, verses 238cd-241 (238-241ab), pages
256-257
Umā’s Seven Forms as the Seven Mothers, verses 242-244

(241cd-244ab), pages 257-259
The Supreme Group of Eight Bodies (mitrtyaṣṭaka), verses 245249ab (244cd-248), pages 259-262
The Twelve Suśivas Governed by Vīrabhadra and the Eight
Mahādevas, verses 249cd (249-251ab), pages 262-263

Summary of the Worlds in the Intellect, verses 252-253 (251cd-

253ab), pages 263-264

The Worlds of the Qualities and of Nature
The Qualities as Unmanifest Nature as the cause of the Intellect,
verses 254-260 (253cd-260ab), pages 264-272
The Three Lines of Teachers in the Three Qualities, verses 261-

262 (260cd-262ab), pages 272-273
A Summary of the two hundred and seven worlds up to the

Qualities, verses 263 (262cd-263ab), page 274

The Group of Eight Yogas in the Qualities according to the

Śivatanu, verses 264ab-269ab (263cd-268), pages 275-276

Śrīkaṇṭha Destroys the Worlds and Rudrāṇi Emits Them. The Gods

Sacrifice There to Prajāpati on Her as Vedī, verses 269cd-272ab

(269-271), pages 276-277
The Eight Rudras in Unmanifest Nature, verses 272cd-274 (272-274ab),

pages 278-279

The Worlds of the Individual Souls (kṣetrajña), verses 275-276ab

(274cd-275), pages 279-280
The Four States of the Senses, verses 276cd-278ab (276-277), pages 280281
The Worlds of the Individual Soul: The Nine False Contentments and the
Eight Accomplishments, verses 278cd-282ab (278-281), pages

281-288

Three Lines of Teachers and Disciples and the Eight Vidyās of the Vital
Channels (nāḍī), verses 282cd-284ab (282-283), pages 288-290

The Agency of the Individual Soul, verses 284cd-286 (284ab-286ab),
pages 291-293
The Group of Eight Components of the Subtle Body (vigrahāṣṭaka),
verses 287ab-288ab (286cd-287), pages 293-295

The Worlds of the Fetters and the Coverings of the Soul
The Ten Attributes of the Body (dehadharma) and the Fetters of
the Soul, verses 288cd-293ab (288-292), pages 295-299
Defining feature of the Fetters, verses 293cd-295ab (293-294),

pages 299-300

The Worlds of the Five Kañcukas, verses 295cd-298 (294-298ab),

pages 300-303
Maāyāguhā -— The Womb of the Cave of Māyā, verses 299-302 (298cd302ab), pages 303-306

The World of Ananta, verses 303ab-307ab (302cd-306), pages 307-309
The Cavity (bila) and the Wombs (yoni, bhaga) of Māyā, verses 307cd-

317ab (307-316), pages 309-313

The Knot of Māyā (māyāgranthi): The Three Cavities of Māyā and the Twelve

Rudras, verses 317cd-320ab (317-319), pages 314-316
Two Groups of Six Rudras According to the Mataṅgatantra, verses 320cd-321cd
(320-321ab), pages 316-317

The Principle of Māyā (māyātattva), verses 322ab-337 (321cd-337ab), pages 317325

The Nine Worlds of Great Knowledge, the Goddess of Speech, verses 338-341ab
(337cd-340), pages 326-331

The Worlds of the Principle of Īśvara

The Eight Worlds and their Vidyeśvaras in the Principle of Īśvara,
verses 341cd-344ab (341-343), pages 332-336
The Succession of the Eight Vidyeśvaras according to the
SŚivatanu, verses (345cd-352) (345ab-352ab), pages 336342
Liberation as the Elimination of all Terms of Office to Attain
Transcendental Siva 353-355 (352cd-355ab), pages 342344

The Four Worlds in the Principle of Īśvara, verses 356-357 (355cd-

357ab), pages 344-346
The Worlds of the Principle of Sadāśiva
The Enclosures and Deities of the Principle of Sadāśiva, verses 358-373
(357cd-373ab), pages 346-354
The Throne of Suśiva, verses 374-377ab (373cd-376), pages 354-355
Śiva Beyond Tranquillity (śāntyātīta), verses 377cd-379ab (377-378),
pages 355-356

Bindu and the Body of Sadāśiva and of the Rudras, verses 379cd-383ab

(379-382), pages 356-359

The Point, the Half Moon (Ardhacandra), and the Obstructress, verses

383cd-386ab (383-385), pages 359-361

The Supreme Form of Sadāśiva, verses 386cd-390ab (386-389), pages
361-362

xi
The Worlds up to Anāśrita

The World of Suṣumnā, verses 390cd-394ab (390-393), pages 362-365

The Cavity of Brahmā, verses 394cd-396a (394-395abc), pages 365-367
The World of the Principle of Power and Raised Kuṇḍalinī, verses 396b-

397 (395d-397ab), pages 367-369

The World of Anāśrita the Unemerged, verses 398-400ab (397cd-399), pages
369-372

The Equal One (Samanā), verses 400cd-402 (400-402ab), pages 372-373
Anāśrita Presides Over the Five Causes, verses 403ab-406 (402cd-406ab), pages
373-375
A Summary of the Worlds (purasaṁgraha) Taught in the Svacchandatantra
Distributed in the Five Kalās, verses 407-428ab (406cd-427), pages 375384

The Worlds according to the Mataṅgatantra, verses 428cd-436 (428-436ab),
pages 384-388
The Worlds according to the Mālinīvijayottara, verses 437-452 (436cd-452b),

pages 388-397

Appendices to Volume Five

Appendix to Chapter Seven: Tantrasāra Chapter Six: The Revelation of
the Path of the Time (kālādhvaprakāśana), pages 398-399
Appendix to Chapter Eight: The Path of the Worlds, pages 400-411

Abbreviations
APS
ASB
AV
BLO
BY
BhGī
BhoKā
BrUp
ChUp
CMSS
DhAKḴ

Ajaḍapramātrṣiddhi
Asiatic Society of Bengal
Atharvaveda
Bodleian Library, Oxford
Brahmayāmala
Bhagavadgītā
Bhogakārikā
B,rhadāraṇyakopaṇiṣad
Chandogyopaṇiṣad
Ciñcinīmatasārasamuccaya
Dharmālaṅkārakārikā

DP

Devīpañcaśataka

DhĀl

GOML

Devīdyvardhaśatikā

Dhvanyālokālocana

HDh

Government Oriental Manuscript Library, University of
Chennai
History of Dharmaśāstra

Ipv
ĪPvv
IFP
ISMEO

Iśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī
Iśvarapratyabhijñāvivr̥tivimarśinī
Institut Français d'Indologie de Pondichéry
Iṣtituto Studi Medio ed Estremo Oriente

JASB
JRAS
JY
KED
KIN
KṆNP
KuKh
KuPa
KhCPS
KM
KṢSS
KṢTS
KṆNP
LYV

Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bombay
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society
Jayadrathayāmala
Kashmiri Series Edition
Kaulajñānanirṇaya
Kramanayapradīpikā
Kumārikākhaṇḍa of the Manthānabhairavatantra
Kulapañcaśikā
Khacakrapañcakasṭotra
Kubjikāmata
Kashmiri Shaivism, the Secret Supreme
Kashmiri Series of Texts and Studies
Kramanayapradīpikā
Laghuyogavāsiṣṭa

i]

ĪŚGDP `
JA

Indo-Iranian Journal

Īśānaśivagurudevapaddhati
Journal Asiatique

Mātaṅgaparameśvarāgama

MBh
MP

Mahābhārata
Mahānayaprakāśa

Trivendrum.
MP (3 AS)
MS

Mahānayaprakāśa by Arṇasiṁha
Manuscript

MP (1 Śk)
MP (2 Tri)

Mahānayaprakāśa commented by Śitikaṇṭha
Mahānayaprakāśa by unknown author published in

xiii
MV
MVV
MW

Mālinīvijayottaratantra
Mālīnīvījayavārtika
Monier-Williams
Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad

MrTVK

Mṛgendratantravṛtti Kriyāpāda

MIT

MṛrKri

MṛrV
NGMPP
NSA
NB
NBT
NT
NTu
no.
p.
PMNKaā
PT
PTy

PS
Pv
PVi

RSO

RT
RauSūS

SB

SBUM

SLJ

SOL
SP

SpKā
SpNi
SpPra

SpSaṁ

Śvet

SSS

Mṛgendratantra

Mṛgendratantra Kriyāpāda

Mṛgendratantra Vidyāpāda
Nepal German Manuscript Preservation Project

Nyāyabindu
Nyāyabinduṭīkā
Netratantra
Netratantroddyota
Number
Page
Paramokṣanirāsakārikā
Parātrīśikā (= Parātriṁśika)
Parātriṁśikavivaraṇa (Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa)
Pāṇini’s Sūtras, the Aṣṭādhyāyī.

Pūrvakāmikā
Paramārthasāra
Pramāṇavārtika

Pramāṇaviniścaya

Pratyabhijñāhṛdaya

Ricerche e Studi Orientali
Rājataraṅginī
Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha

RṚgveda

Śatapathabrāhmaṇa

Saryajñānottara
Sva/Śubodhodayamañjarī

Swami Laksmanjoo
Science of Light
Saṁvitprakāśa

Spandakārikā
Spandanirṇaya
Spandapradīpikā

Spandasaṁdoha

Śivasūtra
Śivasūtravimarśinī
Śivastotrāvali
Śrīmatottara

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad

Satsahasrasaṁhitā

xiv

SSP

SVT
SvTu

SUNY
SYM

TTP

TC
TSRP

Somaśambhupaddhati

Svacchandatantra
Svacchandatantroddyota
Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha
State University of New York Press
Siddhayogeśvarīmata
Tattvatrayaparīkṣā
Tantrāloka
Tattvārthacintāmaṇi
Trika Śāstra Rahaṣya Prakriyā
Tantrasāra

Tantrasadbhāva

Tantroccaya
Taittirīyopaniṣad

Tantravaṭadhānikā

Triśirobhairava

Ūrmikaulāraṇvatantra
Vijñānabhairava
Vāmakeśvarīmata
Vātulanāthasūtra
Yogavāsiṣṭa

Yonigahvaratantra

Upaniṣad

laghu
guru

commentary


ĀHNIKA 8
============================================================

CHAPTER SEVEN
--------------------------------------------------

The Emergence of the Cycles of Mantras (cakrodaya)
‘May the Rudra (who bestows) victory and is the penetration (āveśa) of
the fierce (caṇḍa) Bhairava that has rendered excellent the emergence of (every)

single Mantra and eliminated the impression of fettered existence (bhavamudrā)
make (all that is) auspicious (and beneficial) firm (and stable).”

Now, with the second half (of the verse begun at the end of the previous
chapter,) he sets out to expound the Emergence of the Cycles (of Mantric
breathing) in relation to the principle of Time.
Surely (one may ask), the emergence of the goddess (of the alphabet)
Mātṛkā, who is common to all Mantras, was explained previously (in the
preceding chapter), so what reason is there to also explain the emergence of the
' The word ‘udaya’ literally means ‘arising’ or ‘emergence’. It is commonly used to

denote the rising of the Sun — sūrya, or Moon — candra, in the expressions sūryodaya ~
‘dawn’ and candrodaya — ‘moonrise’. Here the word has a technical sense when

combined with the word ‘cakra’. The word ‘cakra’ literally means ‘wheel’. By
extension, it also means ‘assembly°. So the words ‘devatācakra’, ‘gurucakra’ or
‘sādhakacakra’, for example, denote an assembly of deities, teachers and adepts,

respectively. Thus ‘cakrayāga denotes the sacrificial rite performed by and for an
assembly of initiates.
According to the context, the word ‘cakra’ can also mean, as it does here,

‘cycle’. Mantras recited in consonance with the breathing cycle (prāṇacakra),

depending on their length, form daily cycles of varying sizes. This chapter examines the

measure of these cycles of Mantras that arise, that is, rotate, within the breathing cycle.
As the cycle of the breath does its round, the Mantra recited in consonance with it arises

with each turn from the heart. The dawn of the Sun of exhalation (prāṇodaya) is that of

Mantra also (mantrodaya). The dawning of the cycle of the repetition of Mantra

‘mantracakrodaya’ coincides with the dawning of the cycle of the vital breath —
‘prāṇacakrodaya’. To use Abhinava’s example, with each turn of a waterwheel, the jars
that are attached to it fill and empty out, rising full each time out of the water. Thus,

cakrodaya, that literally means ‘emergence, arising or dawning of the wheels’, denotes

‘the rotation of the cycles of Mantra within the movement of the breath’.
Swami Lakshmanjoo explains in his Trikarahasya: Cakrodaya involves: a)
The Cakrabhid — [the various] cycles of Mantra, and b) Mantrabheda and Vidyābheda
[various Mantras and Vidyās]. For example, one cakra [cycle] is the ordinary cakra
[cycle] of 21,600 breaths of the ordinary course of breathing during one [twenty-four
hour] day. You have to control that cycle (cakra) by lengthening the breath, for

example, by doubling it in length, so that in twenty-four hours you breathe only 10,800

times. [Going on gradually extending the time of a single breathing cycle, you] will
finally breathe only twenty-four times in twenty-four hours. Then you are the master of
the various cycles (cakrabheda) and so have become the master of time. By and by, you

must enlarge the span of time. This involves effort. In the sixth stage of enlargement,

there is yammajopāsana [practice born of effort]. In seventh, it is ayatnajopāsana
[practice born without effort]. There is no [breath] retention [in this effortless practice].”
The emergence of the letters, Mantras and their parts in the breathing cycle was
discussed in the previous chapter, from verse 216 to the end.


ĀHNIKA 9
============================================================

CHAPTER NINE
--------------------------------------------------


The All-pervasive Lord, who is perfectly full by virtue of His
inherent freedom, manifests, devoid as He is of limitation, in countless
forms. (52cd-53ab)
Śiva, who is supreme, manifests in countless, limited forms as living

beings (bhiūta), phenomena (bhāva) and the worlds etc., having set aside
(varjayitvā) (all) limitation within his own nature. The meaning is that His
nature is the unlimited, supreme light (of consciousness), because, even so, his
previous nature (prior to manifesting in this way) is not lost (pracyuta).

Surely (someone may object) that it was said (before) that a
metaphysical principle (tattva) is the pervasive presence of a single nature in

many places (anekatra). How is that (so) here (in this case)?
The Five Pure Subjects

kAÉEIRIĪ-cIḶEEFA ĪĒCEIEEAHHIH'EHI

aarftṝr-afṝ]
mī īṝṁ aard ā-ata || u 1 |

śāṁbhavāḥ śaktijā mantramaheśā mantranāyakāḥ || 53 I|
mantrā iti viśuddhāḥ syur amī pañca gaṇāḥ kramāt |
svasmin svasmin gaṇe bhāti yad yad rūpaṁ samanvayi || 54 |ḷ
tad eṣu tattvam ity uktaṁ kālāgnyāder dharādivat |
The Divine (śāmbhava) (subjects), those Born of Power (śaktija), the
Great Lords of Mantra, the Lords of Mantra and the Mantras - these are
the five groups of pure (subjects), in due order. Whatever be the inherent

nature (rūpa) that shines in its own respective group in conjunction (with

it) is said to be the (particular) tattva amongst these ones. As is (for
example) the Earth (principle, that extends through all its worlds), starting

with Kālāgni. (53cd-55ab)

(The tattva) ‘amongst these ones’ʼ, that is, the five principles beginning
with Śiva. What is their corresponding group? With this doubt in mind, it is said
that the Divine (śāmbhava) and the rest are ‘these five groups’ʼ, ‘in due orderʼ.
Thus, the Divine (subjects) are within the Śiva principle and so on up to the

Mantra (subjects), within the principle of (Pure) Knowledge, respectively.
Concerning this triad, see above, note to 8/15cd-16ab.

'I Cf. above, TĀv intro to 9/2.
“ Concerning these perceivers, see above, 1/77-80 and 4/230 and notes, 9/90cd ff. and
9/138 ff., 10/3 ff. 10/127cd ff. and commentary.

' The five types of subjects experience the corresponding reality levels (tattva) on

which they reside. Thus, the Divine (śāṁṅúbhava) subjects experience Sivatattva, those

TANTRĀLOKA

The Divine (subjects) are those who belong to Śambhu, who is the Supreme
Light. All existing things (bhāva), that is, the world-orders and the rest, have

each attained a state of oneness (tādātmyavṛi) with their corresponding (reality
level), because otherwise it would not be (logically) possible (for them to shine

with) the supreme illuminating (light). As was stated before:

‘The supreme (universal) nature (rūpa), that is permeated without a

break (niviḍa) by the Light (of consciousness) shines within (the worlds) we
have discussed with their many varieties. Associated (anvita) (and inherent
within) them (as their common nature), it is Deity who is Śiva, the one

(reality).”

(The subjects) Born of Power (śaktija) are Anāśrita and the rest. The
Mantramaheśa (subjects) have been explained before. So too in this way, within
the Self of the Mantramaheśas etc. in their own two categories (there are the two
priciples described in the following verse from the Īśvarapratyabhijñā).
‘However, the principle called Sadāśiva (sadākhya) (arises) first of all
due to the prominence (udreka) of the internal state (i.e.

the power of

knowledge). Then comes the (principle) of Parameśvara (i.e. Īśvaratattva), when

the external state predominates.”'

For the reason stated here and elsewhere, the form (of consciousness)

that manifests in consonance with the coming to prominence of the inner state

(and then the external state) etc., is said here, with reference to that, that they are

the principles of Sadāśiva and Īśvara. Itis not with reference to the presiding
deity (at these reality levels). This is because Śiva’s state (śivatva) always
(sadā) shines as the inner form (of universal consciousness), and the Īśvara
(principle) as the outer form. In this same way, Brahmā and the rest (of the
causal deities) would also be counted as separate principles (tattva). Otherwise

(if this were not s0), because they are not different from the causal states (over

which they preside as deities), they would possess two opposite natures

(ardhajātīya) (by asserting that they are also tattvas).® Again, if that were to be

s0, the undesirable consequence would be that a king, even if he be the lord of
all the earth, would be a separate reality (tattva) (from the earth and its
creatures) because he governs the earth, and that is not so. Thus, what has been

said is logically sound (yukta).

Born of Power (śaktija), Śaktitattva, the Great Lords of Mantra, Sadāśivatattva, the

Lords of Mantra, Īśvaratattva and the Mantra subjects Śuddhavidyātattva.

' Above, 9/2ab.

ardhajātīya

is the maxim — nyāya — of ‘being half aged’ (ardhajaratanyāya), that

indicates that it is impossible for two opposite and conflicting qualities to reside in the
same substance, or combining two opposite attributes in a single individual at the same

time, just as person cannot be simultaneously both young and old.
" Saḍāśiva is Śiva shining inwardly, while Īśvara is His shining forth externally.
Śivatattva etc. must not be confused with presiding deities of the Tattva. Śivatattva etc.
represent various states of being of the One Lightin all its degrees of self-awareness,

according to the extent that experience is internalized within consciousness, and so one
with it. Thus, it includes all the manifestations associated with it, including the
corresponding perceivers and Lords associated with each tattva.


ĀHNIKA 10
============================================================

CHAPTER NINE
--------------------------------------------------



He says that:


The Six Causes Are Not Tattvas

eṁkrś 7 7īãd 11 uā 1

gerī] īTvãã šfã ī 7:: |

JGaTTTTTJTVITJTTTTITJTTHT I/w. 1I
G% GāĪTITTYĒTTTATTA
a; |
=fṝ ṝḶṁ sarkī īá āē a-kvm || uc 1

ÉE| Etee

Ṭaī ṬāTJITI. Ṭ TTTT-T
JT |I 48 1|1
tena yat prāhur ākhyānasādṛśyena viḍambitāḥ || 55 ||

brahmā nivṛttyadhipatiḥ pṛthak tattvaṁ na gaṇyate || 56 ||

s tu pṛthag gaṇyanta
brahmaviṣṇuhareśānasuśivānāśritāṁmani || 57 I
satke kāraṇasaṁjñe ‘rdhajaratīyam iyaṁ kutaḥ |
iti taīmūlato dhvastaṁ gaṇitaṁ na hi kāraṇam || 58 ||
yathā pṛthivyadhipatir nṛpas tattvāntaraṁ na hi |
tathā tattatkaleśānaḥ prthaktattvāntaraṁ katham || 59 ||
There are those who, without serving (and listening closely to) a
teacher, have culled from books their own chosen views. Misled by the
similarity of names, they ask why Sadāśiva and the rest should be
counted separately, if Brahmā, the Lord of the power of Cessation

(nivrṛtti,, is not considered to be a separate principle. Again, (they ask) the

reason for this contradictory (presence in one thing of two different
natures), in the case of the group of six termed ‘causes’ (kāraṇa), that is,
Brahmā,
Viṣṇu, Hara (i.e. Rudra), Īśāna (i.e. Īśvara), Suśiva (i.e. Sadāśiva)

and Anāśrita.' (Those who advance such objections are, for the reasons

stated above,) radically refuted. A ‘cause’ is not counted (among the
metaphysical principles). Just as a king, the lord of the earth, is not a

is the name ofa metaphysical principle (tattva), as well as that of one of the

causal principles (karaṇa), concerning which see above, 6/185cd-192ab.
' See below, TĀ 11/51-53 and note 11,104, for a chart of the five Forces (kalā), of

which Cessation (nivṛti) is the first. They are five spheres of energy that encompass
sections of the thirty-six principles. Each one is governed by a presiding deity, called a
Lord of a Causal Principle (kāraṇeśvara), as listed. For more details of these deities
which are a common feature of Śaiva cosmologies, see above notes 1,232 and 570.

' See above, note 8,25, for a chart of the domains of the Causal Forces.

TANTRĀLOKA

reality separate (tattva) (apart from the earth). Similarly, how can the
Lords of a particular sphere of energy (kalā) be considered to be (another)
reality (tattva), separate (from it)? (55cd-59)

‘The similarity of namesʼ, by the similarity of the name Sadāśiva (of

the Causal Deity and the principle).

The Pure Path

tad evaṁ pañcakam idaṁ śudáho ʻdhvā paribhāṣyate |
tatra sākṣāc chivecchaiva kartryābhāsitabhedikā || 60 ||
.That group of five principles is in this way termed this ‘Pure Path’.
There Siva’s will acts directly to differentiate the manifested.

The Impure Path Emitted by Aghoreśa
Surely (one may ask), if this is so, (then) who is the agent on the impure
path? With this doubt in mind, he says:

#T-JITEJBTĪTGJTTPĒTTGII] |

Sfq̄vāṇēāiīṝ: gsīdtē fādazg 11 eg 1
īśvarecchāvaśakṣubádhabhogalolikacidgaṇān |
saṁvibhuktum aghoreśaḥ sṛjatīha sitetaram || 61 ||
Here (according to our teachings), Aghoreśa emits the Impure Path
in order to provide worldly experience to those sentient beings whose

craving for worldly experience (bhogalolikā)' has been aroused by the
Lord’ʼs will.

(The craving for this lower creation) is ‘aroused’ by the will of the
‘Lord’ mentioned previously, who is pure freedom.
' Cf. BhoKā 3: ʻThe craving for worldly experience arises for those sentient souls who,

due to (their) Impurity, have been reduced by the Lord (to being propense to worldly

experience) within the sphere of phenomenal existence, in accord with the condition of
(their) Karma.’ See below 9/62, TĀv ad 9/64, also 9/84cd-86, 143, 225 and 13/78-79.

' See below, 9/143 and 225. Aghoreśa, also called Ananteśa or Ananta, is the form of
Śiva that creates the impure levels of reality within the domain of Māyā, of which it is
the first principle, just below the five ‘pure’ principles generated directly by Śiva
Himself.


ĀHNIKA 11
============================================================

CHAPTER ELEVEN
--------------------------------------------------


The Path of the Forces
May the enthusiasm for victory be victorious! (That) enthusiasm for

victory that rends asunder the fort of fettered existence is the series of paths
shattered to pieces by the power of the reflective awareness of the great
terrifying roar of one’s own nature.
Now he introduces the Path of the Forces with the second half (of the

verse, the first half of which concludes the previous chapter).

īveEt-t iEGeYE'EIE|GHHTEAI
kalādhvā vakṣyate śrīmacchāṁbhavājñānuṣārataḥ |I 1 I

I will now expound the Path of the Forces, in accord with Lord
Siva’s command (śāṁbhavājñā).
The Forces and the Cosmic Eggs
The Nature of the Forces (kalāsvarūpa)

sr̄ḡaczā ftr āīzi īāfx ra 1|] 3 1

yathā pūryoktabhuvanamadhye nijanijaṁ gaṇam |
anuyat parato bhinnaṁ tattvaṁ nāmeti bhaṇyate || 2 ||
tathā teṣv api tattveṣu svavarge ‘nugamātmakam |
vyāvṛttaṁ paravargāc ca kaleti śivaśāsane || 3 |I
It was said before that a (metaphysical) principle (tattva) is said to

be (the common universal) nature (rāpa) that extends through its own

particular group of worlds, and is distinct from the other (principles).
Analogously, according to Śaiva doctrine (śaivaśāsana), a Force (kalā) is
said to be the (common) universal nature that extends through its own
(given) group of these principles, as distinct from other groups. (2-3)

Another translation, possibly a better one, could be: ‘I will now expound the Path of
the Forces in accord with Śambhunātha’s command (śāṁbhavājñā).’ In other words, if

this is the correct translation, Abhinava is saying that he wrote this chapter inspired by
his Trika teacher Śambhunātha, who ordered him to do it.

See above 9/4cd-6ab.


ĀHNIKA 12
============================================================

CHAPTER ELEVEN
--------------------------------------------------


(A Force extends) in the midst of these ‘principles’, which is ‘its own
(given) group’, consisting of one principle and so on, in the manner which will
be explained. It is ‘distinct’ (from other groups) as (the universal) ‘cow-ness’ is
(distinct) from horses and other (animals that are not cows).

Here itself he presents another view.

II

kecid āhuḥ punar yā ʻsau śaktir antaḥ susūkṣmikā |
tattvānāṁ sā kalety uktā dharaṇyāṁ dhārikā yathā || 4 I|
Again, (from another point of view,) some say that this Force is that
extremely subtle power that is present within the Principles, as is, for
example, the sustaining power within the Earth Principle.
(A Force is) ‘extremely subtle’ because it cannot be perceived by itself.
(However,) it must be conceived to exist, because (its) effects could not

otherwise be logically possible. In this way, ‘as is, for example, the sustaining
power present ‘within the Earth Principle’,’ so too (an energy) operates
(kalayitrī) (there) called Nivṛtti (‘Cessation’) because, (fully) extroverted, it

stops

(operating)

once

the

ultimate

limit (parākāṣṭhā)

(of extroverted

objectivity) has been reached. Similarly, (the next) energy (śakti) is called

hā (‘Foundation’) because it operates (kalayitrī) (the principles) from
Water to Nature, by establishing (pratiṣṭhāna) (these) twenty-four principles
within the daily commerce of duality (bhedavyavahāra). One should know the
names of the others in the same way, according to their function (kalana).
(Thus, the following Force is called Vidyā — ((limited) Knowledge), because it

is the cognitive awareness (vedana) of the (contracted) limited (individual) soul.
(The next one is called Śānta — Quiescent) because it quells (the condition of)

the plane of Māyā; and (the highest one is called Beyond the Quiescent —
Śāntātīta) because it is (the transcendent) beyond that.

Although there are two views, in actual fact, there is no difference at all
between them. Thus, he says:

raṁq ṭarz4, 11
atra pakṣadvaye vastu na bhinnaṁ bhāsate yataḥ |
anugāmi na sāmānyam iṣṭaṁ naiyāyikādivat II 5 II
Here, (according to us,) the essential point (vastu) does not appear

to differ from these two perspectives, because we do not maintain that this

Read dharaṇyāṁ for dharaṇyā.

TANTRĀLOKA

common nature (anugāmin) is a universal (sāmānya), as do, for example,
the Naiyāyikas.
The first view, like that of the Naiyāyikas, omitting (to consider) the
nature (of the Forces) as energies, (reckon each to be just) a universal
(sāmānya), the characteristic of which is only that it (pervades and) is associated
(with its corresponding particulars). But, as this is not what is intended, there (in
their case), neither (of the views) is better than the other, because there is no
difference (in either case in the pervasive presence) of (the common universal,
which is) energy.

Others have another view here (about this) also. Thus, he says:


sr̄. aēfa ātaīī gaāevḍ1|

frrā̃ fc-īī ī; aōsf araōaa; 1| . 1
anye vadanti dīkṣādau sukhasaṁgrahaṇārthataḥ |
Śivena kalpito vargaḥ kaleti samayāśrayaḥ || 6 ||

Others say that ‘Force’ is (just) a conventional term (samaya) that

refers to a group (of principles) imagined (kalpita) by Śiva, so that the rites
of initiation and the like may be performed easily in an abbreviated form.


(Abhinava is voicing an opponent’s view here, who objects that,) surely
a conventional term is just (an arbitrary) convention, which is dependent only

(on some individual’s) desire (that it be s0), and so, as it is not ultimately real
(in itself), it is false (asatya). Thus, one can freely (establish any) other

conventional term, and so in this way, there is no binding rule (niyama) (that the
Forces exist and are related to these groups of principles, rather than others).

With this doubt in mind, he says:


kṛtaś ca devadevena samayo ‘paramārthatām |
na gacchatīti nāsatyo na cānyasamayodayaḥ || 7 II

(We reply that this is not so.) A convention established by the Lord

of the gods does not become ultimately unreal. Thus, it is not false, (nor is it
arbitrary, as) no other convention arises (that can replace it).
The reason why (this convention) is established by the Lord of the gods

is that it does not become ultimately unreal, it is not false, and no other

convention arises (to replace it). Otherwise, (if the convention were to be just an

Read devadevakṛtatve for devadevakṛtatvaṁ.


ĀHNIKA 13
============================================================

CHAPTER ELEVEN
--------------------------------------------------


arbitrary human one,) it would be possible for these three (contingencies to be
applicable) here.
The Five Forces and the Cosmic Eggs

fafr: Ūfkēīara sjtr̥r̥aī= |

̃: || ¢ I1
nivṛttiḥ pṛthivītattve pratiṣṭhāvyaktagocare |
vidyā niśānte śāntā ca śaktyante ‘ṇḍam idaṁ catuḥ l| 8 I

‘Cessation’ (Nivṛtti) (is the Force) located in the Earth principle.

(The Force called) ‘Foundation’ (Pratiṣṭhā) is in the sphere of Unmanifest

Nature (that is, within the Principles ranging from Water to Nature). ‘(The
limited power of) Knowledge’ (Vidyā) is (the Force) present (in the
Principles ranging from the individual soul) up to Māyā, while the Tranquil
One (Śānta) (extends) up to the Principle of Power. These four (Forces)
correspond to (the four-fold) Cosmic Egg (aṇḍa).

Goodall 2015: ‘The Forces (Kalā) are so commonly homologized with different

entities in ritual and the Śaiva cosmos that it can be difficult to know what they really
designate. In the Ratnatrayaparīkṣā 86 ff., for example, they are characterized as five
modes or activities of the subtle sound matter bindu (binduvṛttayaḥ), each of which

pervades a section of the cosmos as listed there. . . . Now it seems to us possible, from
reading the Niśvāsa, that they were originally conceived of as four Śaktis of the Lord or
divisions (kalā) of the Lord’s Śakti:’ For various homologizations according to a

number of sources, see plates 3-8 in SŚP vol. 3.

Here the Forces are homologized with the four Eggs (aṇḍa), into which the
principles and worlds that we have come across several times already are
accommodated. (For an extensive account see above, notes 6,371 and 372 ad 6/170cd-

171ab (170) and note 8,498 to 8/175cd-177 (175-177ab)). According to the MV 2/49,

quoted by Jayaratha in the commentary, there are four Eggs (aṇda), set into one another
in such a way that they each encompass various numbers of principles. These
correspond to those distributed within the spheres of the Forces, and so the Eggs are

identified with them. In the following passage in the PTv (p. 250), Abhinava explains

that the Heart of consciousness contracts itself down into the form of the four Eggs.
‘In this way, the Supreme Lord (parameśvara), who is the Heart as such, is
nourished (bṛmhita) by the three powers, and is one with the infinite (forms of)
cognition (saṁvid) that are continuously arising and withdrawing. Conceived in this
form, He breaks through (lumpati) the invisible (adṛṣṭa), unseen integument (maṇḍa)
which is ignorance (akhyāti), that is the Impurity of Māyā, and the essence of
phenomena (bhāva) that is called duality (bheda). In this way, this invisible Heart
disappears (lopin) into the Eggs. There are four Eggs, and (their) ‘disappearance’ here
means ‘contraction’. The Supreme Lord (parameśvara) who is one and is dense
(uninterrupted) consciousness, is (at once) both (pure) knowledge and Māyā. As has

been said:

‘Vision (darśana) is the goddess Parā, recollection (smaraṇa) the goddess
Parāparā, and thought (vikalpa) the goddess Aparā. The Lord is made of (these) three

powers. He possesses both Māyā and knowledge. Māyā consists of the four Eggs, and

TANTRĀLOKA

‘These four (Forces) correspond to (the four-fold) Cosmic Egg

(anḍa).” The Forces of Cessation and the rest pervade the same (spheres of
principles as) do the four Eggs. That is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):
‘It is

said that this (sixfold Path is), in an

abbreviated (form)

(saṅkṣepataḥ), the group of four Eggs. (These are the Eggs) of Earth, Nature,

Maāyā and Power.”

(By saying that the fourth Force extends) ‘up to the Principle of
Powerʼ, he indicates that (in this way) there is occasion (to include) other

energies, such as those on the plane of the Pervasive One and rest, within (that)

Force.


He says that:


śāntātītā śive tattve kalātītaḥ paraḥ śivaḥ |
(The Force ,called) ‘Beyond the Tranquil is within the Śiva

Principle. Supreme Śivais beyond the Forces. (9ab)
‘(The Force called)

‘Beyond the Quiescent’

is) within the Śiva

Principle’. This is the thirty-sixth (principle), which is undivided from all
things, and (implicitly) includes the principle of Śakti. It has been noted

previously that, for the sake of those who need instruction, in order to elucidate
(how it) absorbs the stain of all the notions (concerning its nature), it is also

conceived to haye another form as the thirty-seventh (principle). Thus, it is said
that ‘supreme Śivais beyond the Forces’. The meaning of ‘all the Forcesʼ is
that (this form of Śiva is) without parts (niṣkala), because it is devoid of all the
Forces. Thus, it is said to be ‘ʻsupreme’.
He establishes that that is reasonably so.
Supreme Śiva Makes Himself Known

knowledge, benign (śivā), is grace (anugraha), and is the consciousness (saṁviṭti) of our
own nature.ʼ

MV 2/49.

Jayarathais telling us in this way that the term Śakti here refers to the metaphysical
principle, not the rung on the Ladder of Sound (nādasopāna) called Śakti, which is
followed by the Pervasive One (vyāpinī), With Mind (samanā) and Transmental
(unmanā), all of which are included within the principle of power (śaktitattva). See
Appendix A to Chapter One and below, 11/12cd-13ab and introductory remarks.

Supreme Śivais the thirty-seventh principle beyond the thirty-sixth, and so transcends
the Forces (kalātīta).

See below, 11/21cd-22ab.


ĀHNIKA 14
============================================================

CHAPTER ELEVEN
--------------------------------------------------


na hy atra vargīkaraṇaṁ ṣamayaḥ kalanāpi vā || 9 l|
yujyate sarvatodikkaṁ svātantryollāsadhāmani |
(Supreme Śiva) is the omnipresent abode of the exuberance of the

creative freedom (of consciousness), and so no classification, whether a

convention or a conception (kalanā), is applicable here (to Him). (9cd-10ab)

‘Classification’ has two aspects. The first conventional (samaya), and

the other conceptual (kalanā), which is the various ways in which (Supreme
Śiva) is imagined to be. The reason here for this is that it is in all respects ‘the
exuberance of the creative freedom (of consciousness)’.

Surely (one may ask), if that is so, how can such teachings as ‘one

should know that Śiva is the agent of all actions’ (ever) come to be conceived?

With this doubt in mind, he says:


aaāa-zaṛ fīi #7 āīāṁīcfr=gaīd 1| 2e 1|

3TRVTTTHVITĀTÁTHTTGA |

svātantryāt tu nijaṁ rūpaṁ boddhṛdharmād avicyutam || 10 l|
upadeśatadāveśaparamārthatvasiddhaye |
bodhyatām ānayan devaḥ sphuṭam eva vibhāvyate || 1 1 II
yato ‘taḥ śivatattve ‘pi kalāsaṁgatir ucyate |

We can clearly observe that even though (Śiva’s) own (essential)
nature (rūpa) does not fall from (His) inherent nature as the (supreme and

universal) subject (boddhṛdharma), He freely (chooses) to become an object
of our understanding. (He does this) so that instruction may be possible, in
order to achieve (true and) ultimate absorption (in Him). It is because of
this that it is said that the Śiva Principle (śivatattva) also is associated with a
Force. (10cd-12ab)

‘It is because of this’, namely that, although (Śiva) is the (supreme and
universal) subject, because, by virtue of His freedom, He is experienced
(vibhāvana) objectively, he is (said to be) ‘associated with a Force’. The
meaning being that He is related to this and that notion (concerning His nature).


That is said (in the Īśvarapratyabhijñā):


‘The Lord, by virtue of His freedom, which is the absence of duality,

having fashioned (his own) Self (ātman), that (abides) unforsaken (by that)

! Read kalpanīyatāṁ for kalanīyatār.

TANTRĀLOKA

freedom, with notions that He is the Lord (Īśa) and the like, behaves (as such in

daily life).

This (view) has been previously logically established in many ways and
so there is no need to make an effort (to do so here) again. The nature of (this)
Force is said to amount to just this.
Surely (one may object): alright, let that be (as you say), we do not
disagree here (about this); however, how is it that the Egg is said to extend up to

the end of Power, and not (up to the end of) the Pervasive One and the rest?


With this doubt in mind, he says:


The Four Eggs

3JTG
H JGTfYTTTRATTĒTTĨT]
II 23 11

aṇḍaṁ ca nāma bhuvanavibhāgasthitikāraṇam || 12 ||
prāhur āvaraṇaṁ tac ca śaktyantaṁ yāvad asti hi |
(The wise) say that the (Cosmic) Egg is an enveloping covering

(āvaraṇa) that (extends) up to (the Principle of) Power, and is responsible

for the division of the world orders into groups (up to that Principle).

(12cd-13ab)

(The word) ‘that’ refers to the obscuring covering.
ŚSurely (one may object) that thereis a division of world orders here (in
the Śiva principle, but) thereis no obscuring covering in the form of an Egg that
serves as a cause of that. Thuṣ, thisis (indeed) a novel manner of talking (about

this). Accordingly, he says (in response to this objection):

ū̄ṁ r̥̄TTafā: 1| 23 1
EiGĪSPIEFIṢÁḤEIĒE-EISISĒEĒE

yady api prāk śivākhye ‘pi tattve bhuvanapaddhatiḥ || 13 II
uktā tathāpy apratighe nāsminn āvṛtisaṁbhavaḥ |

(The Egg of Power does not extend further) because even though a
series of world-orders was previously said to be present in the principle

' ĪP 1/5/16, quoted above with variants in TĀv ad 1/72 (73) (see note there), ad

3/227cd-278ab
(1/5/16a).

(277),

9/159

(1/5/16a),

11/28,

15/315-317

and

29/126cd-127ab

See places listedin previous note.
"√ Here again Jayarathais addressing the mistake of identifying the principle — tatva—

of Śakti, and the station of development of Sound thatis also called Śakti.


ĀHNIKA 15
============================================================

CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


to the main (Mantra) with sesamum seeds and one hundred (oblations of)
cḷarified butter made with the small ladle. In the same way, (he should

offer) one sixth (the number of libations of the times he has repeated) the

limbs and faces, and a tenth of (the repetitions of) the remaining Mantras

also. (One can offer) even a thousand or more oblations also to satisfy (the

Mantra deities), according to the money one has (to do this). (421-422)

(418cd-420ab)
(Then

the

teacher

(mṛgīmuḍrā). As is said:

should

make)

‘(the

gesture

of)

the

deer

‘O Great Goddess, when the tip of the thumb is conjoined to the middle
and ring fingers and the index and little fingers are extended at a distance from
one another, that is the great gesture called that of the deer.”
There is no rule that there should be (just) a hundred oblations. Thus, he

says that ‘(one can offer) even a thousand or more’. Thus, it is said

(repeatedly) in various places (in the scriptures), ‘one should not be miserly”.

Surely (one may ask), if the libation can be accomplished with just a

hundred oblations, then what is the use (of offering) a thousand or more
oblations, that (serve only to) consume (more) money? With this doubt in mind,

he says:

The Sacrificer Should Not be Stingy,
Vāmā’s Power will Bind Him

rrāfzrgpīrīāsfṁāṁa 7 fē-=fā 11 x23 1
sati vitte ‘pi lobhādigrasto bāhyapradhānatām |
prathayaṁś cidguṇībhāvāc chaktipātaṁ na vindati |/ 423 ||

One who, although he has money, is consumed by greed and the

like, perceiving that external (matters) are the most important,
consciousness takes second place, and so he does not receive a descent of the
power (of grace). (423) (420cd-421ab)
‘Perceiving that external (matters) are the most importantʼ, because

of (his) obstinate inclination for outer things like money. As is said:

‘He who, although there is money, does not carry out the full extent of
the prescribed procedure out of greed, does not get any fruit at all.’
Also quoted above in TĀv ad 15/36cd-37ab. See note there.

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask), what is the (scriptural) authority here (to support

the view) that, just due to this alone, he receives no descent of the power (of
grace)? With this doubt (in mind, he says):

uktaṁ svacchandatantre tad dīkṣito 'pi na mokṣabhāk |
It is said in the Svacchandatantra that ‘even though he is initiated,

he is not liberated.”" (424ab) (421cd)

Now, there is no disagreement here that what has been done, (at least) to

some extent, is not not done. So, what would be the fruit of the rites performed
in the course of the initiation of one who is (afflicted with) greed and the like?


He voices this doubt:


nanu yat tasya dīkṣāyāṁ kr̥taṁ karmāsya kiṁ phalam || 424 ||
Surely (one may ask), what fruit (does a miser) get from the rites

performed in the course of (his) initiation?®’ (424cd) (421ef)

He answers this (question as follows):


TTTTRĪTTTTGTTI āTHTRTFTATTTṬ |

F-JT T-Tā ā TāRTITAHTTTaTT II|`#42Ū I
tatrāhur gamaśāstrajñā vāmāśaktimayās tadā |
mantrā badhnanti taṁ ṣamyag bhavakārāmahāgṛhe || 425 ||
ṢVṬ 1/21d SVT read muktibhāk for moksabhāk.

māyānvitaḥ śathah krūṟo nihsatyaḥ kalahapriyah | 20 l|

kāmī ca lobhasampannaḥ śivabhaktivivarjttaḥ |

dāūṣako gurusāstrāṇāṁ dīkṣito ‘pi na muktibhāk | 21 |ḷ
Śśaṭhaḥ asvacchahṛdayaḥ, krūro raudraprakṛtiḥ, kalahapriyo vitaṇḍāvān, lobhasampannaḥ sam-

bhavasattāyām api pūyādiṣu vittaśāṭhyavān | śivabhakúītyādā vilayaśaktyāghrātatvam asyoktam

| na mukúibhāg iry anena ṣvāmmany eva asya bhāyapradatvam uktam sarveṣāṁ śiṣyatvāt | 2 Iḷ

‘He who is deluded (māyānvta), deceitful, cruel, a liar, delights in quarrelling, lustful,

stingy, devoid of devotion for Śiva, critical of the teacher and the scriptures, even though he 1s
initiated, he is not liberated. SvT 1/20cd-21

(A person who is) dece1tful 1s one whose heart is not pure. One who is cruel has a fierce

(vtolent) nature. One who delghts 1n quarrelling engages in useless illogical dispute. One who 1s
stngy is one who though he has means, when it comes to rites of worship or the like, he is
decetful about hss wealth. (One who 1s devoid of) devotion to Śiva and the like is said to be

affected by the (Śiva's) destructive power (vlayaśakti).’
’ Cf. above, 15/36cd-37ab.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


Those who know the Gamaśāstra say (in response to such questions)
that, the Mantras are then (in that case) made of Vāṃā’s power, (and s0)

they bind him as is fitting (samyak) in the great edifice of the prison of
transmigratory existence. (425) (422cd-423ab)

‘Then (in that case)ʼ, when external (matters) are the most important
and consciousness takes second place. This is the meaning.

JĪTTT TNITTRTTHTĪTGĒHTĪTRBAT] II#RĒ II
yā tv anugrāhikā śaktis teṣāṁ sā gurudīpitā |
śodhayeta svaśāstrasthaniṣkāmollaṅghanakriyām || 426 ||
(However), the gracious power (of Lord Śiva) they do possess,
energized (dīpitā) by the teacher, serves to purify the involuntary
transgressions of the rules of their own scriptures. (426) (423cd-424ab)
‘Theyʼ’ are those who have received initiation who possess ‘the
gracious power (of Lord Śiva). Energized through ritual, yoga and knowledge
by the teacher, it ‘serves to purify’ the involuntary, that is, without prior desire,

transgression of the rule which, consisting of prohibitions and injunctions, is
found in the scripture given (by the teacher) as one’s own. Moreover, as that is
so, ultimately his own (true) nature manifests, in accord with the view that (is

expressed in the following verse):

“Thus, because he has not caused obstacles (to others), and being for

some time the most excellent king of demons (piśāca), his soul is pure and he

aṭtains equality with the Supreme Lord.”

(However,) when (the Mantras are) presided over by the power (called)
Vāmā, because external (matters) are (deemed to be) the most important and
consciousness takes second place, one’s own nature is obscured from (its very)
root, and so (the power of grace) can do nothing at all. Thus, it was rightly said
that: ʻone who is consumed by greed and the like does not receive a descent of

the power (of grace).’ Moreover, it was said before:

‘Such (a teacher) is firmly governed by Vāmā, and is the most fettered
of souls (paśūttama). Even though he has heard sufficiently about the
knowledge of Siva, his sole attitude (vṛttitva)
is dualistic, and he does not give it
up. How can one who, once obscured by Siva, is by the power of (karmic)
’ The same metaphor is found also above in 12/21ab.

’ Thus, initiation has postive results, even i those who receive t are unworthy. Presumably ths
verse is also drawn from the Gamatantra, as it continues directly from the previous one.

4 This verse is set in Arya metre.
’ Above, 15/423ab (420cd).

TANTRĀLOKA

necessity (niyati) rendered dependent (on others) (paratantrita), attain the

Lord's plane of being (patipada)?”

One should offer a full oblation in this way at the end of the fire
sacrifice (homa), in_order to complete it. Accordingly, he explains that

procedure (prayoga).”

The Full Oblation

T̃ 3aāTīTIHTC-ĀĪAĪ-TCATTĀTT |

gqr-jdi Sīa’ṝcaīcH’araTTSTHTṬÑĀT II/#2' 1I

IEḵUUEGFEṬEGIEIĒEIUETHĪṈ

gqTIrTH ṜITR TTCTTTTHT I|/#30 1|

tata ūrdhvãādharanyāsād anyonyaunmukhyasundaram |
sruksruvaṁ śivaśaktyātmādāyājyāmṛtapūritam || 427 ||
samacittaprāṇatanur aikātmyavidhiyogataḥ |

vāmaṁ srugdaṇḍagaṁ hastaṁ dakṣiṇaṁ sopayāmakam || 428 |I

kanṭhādhogaṁ vinikṣipya drdhamāpīḍya yatnavān |
adhaḥ kuryāt srucaṁ prāṇam ūrdhvordhvaṁ saṁniyojayan || 429 ||
yāvad áviṣaṭkaparyante bodhāgnau candracakrataḥ |
srugagrāt paramaṁ hlādi pated amṛtam uttamam || 430 ||
tāvad vahnau mantramukhe vauṣaḍantāṁ hutiṁ kṣipet |

(The teacher) then takes up the large and small ladles® filled with

the nectar of clarified butter, their nature SŚiva and Śakti. By placing one
below and the other above, they are beautiful with their mutual intent on

one another. (Then his) mind, breath and body equal (in balance and well
controlled) by being engaged in the procedure of oneness; the left hand is

on the handle of the large ladle, the right (hand), which has a braided ring
of darbha grass (upayāmaka) (on one finger), is placed below the neck (of
’ Above, 13/314cd-316ab.
“’ Now Abhinava returns to talking about the fire offering.
“’ The sruk is a wooden ladle that 1s used to pour clarified butter into the fire. The sruva is a
smaller wooden ladle which is used to take the clarified butter or mulk from their container (sthālī)
and pour it nnto the large ladle. Jayaratha notes that the clarified butter 1s only in the sruk.

“ Ṭhis is not the meaning of the word ‘upayāmaka found in the dictonary. MW says that itis ‘a
partcular veṣsel for ladling out; a ladle (used at a sacnfice)ʼ. Thīs is clearly not what is meant


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


the small ladle), and (the two are then) firmly squeezed (together with both

hands). Having done this, exerting himself (and attentive), he should lower

the large ladle, (tipping it towards the fire), as he conjoins the vital breath
(prāṇa) to increasingly higher (levels), until (this) supremely blissful, most
excellent nectar falls from the tip of the ladle, that is, from the Wheel of the

Moon (located there), into the fire of consciousness (that burns) at the

extremity of the End of the Twelve. (The teacher) should thus cast the
(final) oblation that ends with VAUSAT into the fire, which is the mouth of

(all) Mantras. (427-431ab) (424cd-428)

‘By placing one below and the other above’ʼ, as is usual (in accord

with) ‘their nature as Śiva and Śakti’. Thus, the small ladle is above the large
one. As is said (in the scriptures):

‘The base of the large ladle (should be at the height of) the location of
the navel. the cavity at its extremity (agramukha) (should be) level and facing
upwards. Ó goddess, the small ladle is placed facing down on top of the large

Thus, because they are Śiva and Śakti, it is right that they should be

mutually (facing and) intent on one another, so that (one may) attain the

desired fruit. Thus, because they penetrate into each other and so are mutually

intent on one another, even though (the clarified butter) is only in the large
ladle, it is said without distinction that (the ladles are) ‘filled with the nectar of

cḷarified butter’. In this way, (the teacher) ‘takes up the large and small
ladlesʼ that are such. The teacher’s body, vital breath and intellect etc. are in a
state of (harmonious) oneness, brought about by (his unifying) contemplation

(anusandhāna) of the (one) supreme nondual (reality). (His) left hand is at the
base of the handle of the big ladle that is turned upwards. The right (hand),
‘which has a braided ring of darbha grass (upayāmaka) (on one finger)’,
faces downwards, as does the small ladle. Held at its (upper) extremity, below
its neck, (the hand is) placed on the front part (agrapītha) (of the handle) that
has the shape of the fire altar (vedika). Having pressed together these
extremities, (the ladles are) ‘firmly squeezed (together)’, with the two hands
placed in this way (the lower at the bottom of the handle of the big ladle and the
upper at the top). (The teacher,) ‘exerting (himself) (and attentive), conjoins
the vital breath (prāṇa) properly ‘to increasingly higher (levels)’, beginning
from the heart, by progressively crossing over each level. (As he does this,)

here. My translation is based on Jayaratha’s explanation. It is standard practce for those
parúcipating in a rite to wear a ring like thus.

ṭ seems that the mouth of the big ladle 1s technically called candracakra, which literally means
‘the Wheel of the Moon. We have observed many examples of the common metaphor of lunar
fluid dripping from above into the fire of consciousness. The Wheel of the Moon at the orifice of
the ladle is thus the outer counterpart of the one located in the End of the Twelve at extremity of
the subtle body.

” This verse is also quoted above in TĀv ad 15/282-283ab, as part of a loṇger citaton drawn
from either the Nandiśikhā or the Ánandaśāsana.

7 Read prepsita- for prekita-.

TANTRĀLOKA

contemplating the fall of the stream of clarified butter, he ‘should lowerʼ it

slowly until ‘(this) supremely blissful’ and hence ‘most excellent nectar falls

from the large ladle, which is characterized as consciousness and is established

on the supreme peak (of consciousness), ‘into the fire of consciousnessʼ, that

burns up the universe and is located ‘at the extremity of the End of the
Twelveʼ. (In other words,) it should flow forth as that which further awakens
the fire of consciousness. ‘(The teacher) should thus cast the (final) oblation
that ends with VAUSAT’, that is, offer the (final) full oblation, as that which

makes (the deity fully) satisfied, into the outer ‘fire which’, as a means to ingest
each of the sacrificial substances, ‘is the mouth’ of all Mantras. The ‘ʻupayāma’
is the upper knot, which is perceived to be the sword of knowledge. It is an
arrangement of (blades of) darbha (grass) in the form of a braid. As they say:

‘The braid, which is the most excellent sword of consciousness, is made

from thirty-six blades of Darbha (grass), the size of the palm (of a hand)

(tāla), and (is consecrated) with Śiva’s weapon repeated (over them) seven
times.”

Surely (one may ask), what is the purpose of contemplating (this rite)
in this way? With this doubt in mind, he says:

z 3šī fṝa ũaī: gr= y vṁataā: 11 xae 1

iitilETḤ ṇTGH&HRGIHTSHHTMHN™H II/#32 II

ya ūrdhve kila saṁbodhaḥ kuṇḍe sa pratibimbitaḥ || 431 ||
vahniḥ prāṇaḥ srukṣruvau ca snehaḥ saṅkalpacidrasaḥ |

itthaṁ jñātvāditaḥ kuṇḍasrukṣruvājyamanūn bhṛśam || 432 |
dvādaśāntavībodhāgnau ruddhvā pūrṇāhutiṁ kṣipet |
The consciousness that is above, reflected in the (sacrificial) pit, is

the fire. The large and small ladles are the vital breath. The clarified butter
is the juice of (the aesthetic delight of) consciousness of (the sacrificer’s
sacred) intent (saṅīkalpa-cidrasa). Having known (this) in this way from the

start, and having firmly placed in the fire of consciousness (that burns) in
the End of the Twelve, the fire pit, the large and small ladles, the butter and
the Mantras, (the teacher) should cast the (final) full oblation (into the
outer fire). (431cd-433ab) (429-430)
The consciousness that is located above, reflected below in the
(sacrificial) pit, is the fire. The vital breath, which is like that (also), is

Spreading the fingers of the hand, the area covered from the thumb to the index finger is called
a ʻtāla’, up to the middle finger, ‘gokarṇa’, and up to the little finger ‘vitasta’.
Read evam anusandhāne for evam abhiṣandhāne.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


(embodied in) the large and small ladles. The juice of (the aesthetic delight of)
consciousness is the reflective awareness of oneness in this way." Having first

of all contemplated (these things in this way) and firmly placed the (sacrificial)
pit and the rest in the fire of consciousness (located) in the End of the Twelve,

and having made (them) one (in that fire), which is like the original form

(bimba) (of which all things are a reflection), by the process of ascent there in
each place (along it), ‘(the teacher) should cast the (final) full oblation (into
the outer fire)ʼ. Just as the condition of these external things, that are like

reflections, are progressively lower, (so too conversely, the condition of these
internal things, that are like original reflected objects, are at progressively higher
levels).
Surely (one may ask), if the condition of the original reflected object is
progressively higher, then the condition of the reflection should be
(correspondingly) progressively lower. What is this way of reasoning (naya)?
Taking this doubt into consideration, (he responds) by presenting an example.

yathā yathā hi gaganam utpatet kalahaṁsakaḥ l| 433 ||
jale bimbaṁ vrajaty asya tathety atrāpy ayaṁ vidhiḥ |
According to how a goose (kalaharitsa) flies up into the sky, so does

its image (bimba) move™ (reflected) in water. The same happens here.”
(433cd-434ab)

The ‘image’ is in the form of a reflection.
Now he talks about another variety of this same kind of synthetic

contemplation (anusandhāna).

Inner Ascent Through the Tattvas
by a Series Inner Conjunctions

aṇṛṀṭḷḷ fex a za dī a T.I: 1M 3

cḷ aaTaāãīdhdī f’’amṁ=āaāRTT |I/`#34 1I

Ṭē.AṬĪ] j¥IRḤJTT] TAT TĀT I

Ei|ĒEIUIĒEIHEJEAIIEAĒGÉHḤÚĪRAIAṬ

ḺiēēimEāEzĀkṭIEĒEEETĀATPHCI
Read evam abhedaparāmarśātmā for evaṁ bhedaparāmarśātmā.
7Read vrajaty asya for bruḍaty asya.
” Literally: ‘such is the case here with thss procedure’.

TANTRĀLOKA

Jrṝ tTā ā̄ dārsavīH 1| #3¢ 11|
svābhāvikaṁ sthiraṁ caiva dravaṁ dīptaṁ calaṁ nabhaḥ || 434 ||
māyā bindus tathaivātmā nādaḥ śaktiḥ śivas tathā |
itthaṁ vyāãpyavyãpakato vibhedyābhyantarāntaram || 435 ||
tadadhahsthāni prthvyādimūlāntāni tathā pumān |
avidyārāganiyatikālamāyākalās tathā || 436 ||
aṇur vidyā tadīśeśau sādākhyaṁ śaktikuṇḍalī |
vyāpinī samanaunmanyaṁ tato ‘nāmani yojayet || 437 |
recakastho madhyanāḍīsandhivid gurur ity adaḥ |
proktaṁ traiśirase tantre ‘parayojanavarṇane || 438 ||
It is said in the Traiśiras Tantra, in (the section in which)
conjunction with the another (aparayojana) is described: ‘A. 1) Māyā and
the Drop (bindu), 2) the Self, 3) Sound, 4) Power and 5) Śiva (pervade) B. 1)
one’s own nature (svābhāvika) and what is solid (sthira), 2) liquid (drava), 3)
burns (dīpta), 4) moves (cala), and 5) space (nabhas), respectively." In this
way, that is, on the basis of the relationship between the pervaded and the
pervader, progressively breaking through further inwards, the individual
soul (of the disciple should be conjoined first to all the principles) below (it),
beginning with Earth and ending with (Māyā, which is called) the Root.
C. 1) (Then beyond that to) the Ignorance (of the limited capacity to
know), Attachment (raga), Necessity (niyati), Time, Māyā, the power (of
limited agency) (kalā), the individual soul, 2) (Pure) Knowledge (vidyā)

(together with) its Lord, Iśa (i.e., Īśvaratattva), Sadāśiva (sādākhya), 3)

Śaktikuṇḍalī, the Pervasive One, the Equal One and 4) the Transmental.
The teacher who is established in exhalation and knows the conjunctions
within the Central Channel (madhyanāḍīsandhivit) should then 5) conjoin
(the disciple with Śiva, who is called) Without Name. (434cd-438) (432436ab)
1) Here, (according to us), the Supreme Goddess’s power is called

Maāyā. Its nature is to conceal the (true) essential nature (of things). (Māyā) is

pervasive and so pervades ‘one’s own nature’ʼ, and having pervaded and
shrouded it, abides (in this form). Thus, contracted by that, it is the Self (at all

levels of subjectivity,) starting with the Fully Conditioned (perceiver). It (too) is

pervasive and so pervades ‘what is solid’, that is, Earth’s nature, in this way in
accord with the sequence (of the levels of pervasion,) which are going to be
described.
2) The Drop is nourishing and so (pervades what is) ‘liquid’, that is,
watery. 3) And (similarly,) Sound (pervades what) ‘burnsʼ, that is, is fiery. 4)
Power is predominantly touch, (that pervades what) ‘movesʼ, that is, is windy.
]) Māyā and the Drop (bindu) pervade one’s own nature (svābhāvika) and what is solid
(sthira). 2) The Self pervades what is liquid (drava). 3) Sound pervades what burns (dīpta). 4)
Power pervades what moves (cala). 5) Siva pervades space (nabhas).


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


5) Śiva is devoid of obscuring coverings and so (pervades) ‘space’. This (is said
in the Kālottara, where we read):
‘Earth, Water, Fire, Air and Space — these are the five principles by

which the entire universe is pervaded.”

By encompassing the thirty-five principles from Earth up to “Śakti in
accord with this view, (the teacher) ‘knows the conjunctions within the
Central Channelʼ, that is, he knows that thoroughly (tanmarmajña). The
teacher ‘established in’ the upward ‘exhalation’ progressively breaks through
further and further inwards, that is, further and further upwards, in the manner
(taught in the Svacchandatantra, where it says) ‘by abandoning the six (causes),

in the seventh (the yogi achieves) merger (into the Supreme Principle).’”'" Then

finally, by means of the practice (yukti) described previously, he conjoins (his
disciple) with (the one called) Without Name, that is, the Inexplicable
(anākhya), Supreme Śiva, who is established in the End of the Twelve. This is

taught in this way

in detail

in the chapter’""

in

the

venerable

Triśirobhairavatantra concerning (initiation by a process of ascending)
conjunctions (to progressively higher realities) (yojanikāprakaraṇa).
Having explained that by the way, he says (the following) in order to

talk about the preparation of the sacrificial pap (caru).

The Preparation and Consumption of
the Sacrificial Pap (carusaṁsiddhiī)

T-°̄t ārāaāīgg fō-̄āī ēT-TĀITI: 1|| /#3o ||

šĩ #Id a ̄caā JTF̄TTCATJTRT; || #2 ||
šaTTTTSJ JTIT] T-aTSIĪ T 3 7aT |

qdT HIṬŪGTT J̄HĪCGhTYI: TZT I| #x32 1|
Sārdhatriśatikālottara 8/1cd-2ab. The first line of this verse is quoted above in TĀv ad 11/19.

The second line is reproduced literally as TĀ 1 1/19cd.
1 ṢyT 4/246b. Also quoted above ad 6/192 (191cd-192ab) (see note there) and below ad 15/498500 (494cd-496). The ‘six” are the six causal deities (karaṇadevatā) Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra,
Iśvara, Sadāśiva and Siva, arranged along the stages of the utterance of OM. The seventh beyond
is Supreme Siva. See Dyczkowski 2004: 54-55.

Abhinavagupta refers to the chapters of the Tantrāloka as ‘prakaraṇas’. See for example,

above 1/287 and 2/1. There are many words for ‘chapter’ in Sanskrit. Abhinava uṣes this one to
refer to chapters in Tantras. For example, in the Kāmikāgama (TĀA 4/25). Or it can refer to just a
section dealing with a certain topic.

! Verses 15/431cd-438 (429-436ab) are a short parenthesis, 439 (436cd) ff. follows on from
434ab (431cad).

TANTRĀLOKA

T̄ ̄caĩtŪḷ JgaTk̄: ṬT: || `

tataḥ prāksthāpitanyastamantrasaṁskṛtavahninā |

caruḥ sādhyo ‘thavā śiṣyair homena samakālakaḥ l| 439 ||
carau ca vīradravyāṇi laukikāny athavecchayā |

carusiddhau samastāś ca kriyā hṛmmantrayogataḥ || 440 ||

tataś caruṁ samādāya gurur ājyena pūritām |
srucaṁ sruvaṁ vā kr̥tvaiva bhuktimuktyanusārataḥ | 441 ||
devānām atha śaktīhāṁ mantrāṇāṁ tu trayaṁ trayam |
saptamaṁ mātr̥ṣadbhāvaṁ kramād ekaikaśaḥ paṭhan || 442 ||
svā ity amṛtavarṇena vahnau hutvājyaśeṣakam |
carau hety agnirūpeṇa juhuyāt tat puṇaḥ punaḥ || 443 ||

7Then the sacrificial Pap
pap (caru) should be prep.
prepared, with the fire
that was installed previously (for this purpose) and purified, and on which

the Mantras have been deposited.™ (It can be prepared) by either (the

teacher) or the disciples at the same tīme as (the teacher makes) the

offering to the fire. One can use either Kaula substances (vīradravya) or
ordinary (Vedic) ones (laukikadravya) in the sacrificial pap, as desired.”

1 This passage begins with ‘then’ (iataḥ), that is, presumably, after the disciple has been
conyoined with Śiva. However, Jayaratha says that the initiaton Abhinava has drawn from the
Trisirobhaiṟava is taught here ‘by the way°. So, it is not certain that thss passage is also drawn

from there. Even if it is, it may well not have followed directly after in the oruginal. Nonetheless,
it is not unreasonable to suppose that it 1s drawn from the Triśirobhairava. The mantras for the

preparaton of the sacrificial pap are Trika mantras, which indicates that the passage 1s drawn
from a Trika Tantra, as is the Triśrrobhaiṟava.

Read -sthāpitanyasta- for -sthāpitānyasta-. See above, 15/414 (411cd-412ab). There the
preparation of the fire s described bricfly based on MV 8/115-116.
! The preparation of the sacrificial pap is taught briēfly m the MV 8/119cd-122ab, that Jayaratha

quotes further ahead ad 15/447-449ab (444cd-446). This is not Abhinava’s source, but it does
contain details that agree with the MV. Other details concerntng the ingredients of the sacrificial
pap are drawn from a dfferent Trika source, which is more Kaula than the MV., as is the
Trśirobhairava. There are many varieties of caru, in its most basic, simplest form, it is rice
boiled in water with mulk or just cooked in steam. The caru used for Kaula rites is made from

meat, spices, garlic and the like, that conventional Vedic norms constder to be impure (see below).
In standard Siddhānta rites, caru is given to postulants to eat at the end ofa preliminary

purification (adhivāsa) that prepares them for the rte of initiation. Kaula and similar sources

attrbute a special importance to the consumption of the sacrīficial pap (carubhojana). There are
many occasions when it is eaten, a Kaula adept (vīra) hopes to be offered it by a Yoginī in a
sacred site after ritual union. According to these Kaula sources, eating the caru gives the adept
both accomplishments (sddhi) and liberaton. (See Dyczkowski 2009: vol 1, p. 242, 579, 686;
vol. 2, p. 257; vol. 3, p. 145-146 and 151-152).
Let us see, first of all, what the Sddhāntas say The earliest reference to caru is found in
the Mūlasūtra of the Niśvāsatattvasamhitā.

‘Afterwards, he should cook the caru using unhusked grains of (either) śāli or the rice

that ripens in sixty days, together with handfuls . . . He should make the caru (using the above
ingredients) together with ghee and milk, while uttenng the brahmamantras; haying made 1t, he

should oblate one (part), offer (the second part) to the god, and the third to all the sādhakas, after

(they have sipped) the five products of the cow.’ 3/10-12ab


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------

Goodall explains: “The caru in non-tantric contexts is for gods and manes, but in tantric

contexts, of which this may be the first known example, the caru is often offered to Śiva in the

main support of worship, then to Śiva in the fire, then to (to Śiva) in the disciples and ācārya (cf.

e.g. Mṛgendrakriyāpāda 7/47-50, Kiraṇa 18/34 and Vīāśikhatantra 19-20, all m the context of
preparation for adhivāsa [the preliminary purifying rite to prepare for imtiation]. Here in the

Nisśvāṣa the third part of the caru is given simply to the ‘sādhakas’ in general.’


Cf. Dīkṣottara 14/68-71ab edited and translated by Goodall (2015: p. 262-263):

‘One who knows the mantras should cook the caru according to the enjomed rite.

Having transformed the vessel into the sakala deity using the (mantra of the) god of the gods

together with the aṅgamantras and the five brahmamantras, he should install Śiva in it. He should

first place the three attvas (namely, āmatattva, vidyātattva and svvatattva) and then place Śtva

after the tattva(s). Havung smeared it with ghee, he should fill it with milk. Concentrated, he
should make the caru with barley, wheat and wild rice, with sixty-day rice (?) or with millet
(kaṅhunā). Dīkṣottara 14168-71ab

The Tantrasadbhāva, an important Trika Tantra, describes its preparation as follows.
caruṁ [k, g: caru] vai śrapayet mantrī kṣīreṇāmrṛtavatsayā |

śyāmākatanḍulair devi nīvārair vā priyaṅgubhiḥ l| 53 11
sṣaṣṭyā śālyātha vā devi yavagodhūmavrīhibhīḥ |

tāmrasauvarṇarājatyā athavā mṛnmayena vā || 54 |I

sudṛḍhā nivranā snigdhā kṣālayen mālavidyayā [k: kṣālanānmī̃-; kh: -yetmīlavidyāṁyā] |
80a kh] śivāgnau colmukaṁ gṛhya [k, g: gūhya] bahirante ca dīpayet || |I [g ?]
śrapayet tena cāgnau tu kr̥tarakṣā prasannavān |

ghrtadigdhām tataḥ sthālīṁ [kh: sthālī] kr̥vā kṣīrapariplutām || 56 ||
sthāpayed vahnimadhye tu yathā saniścalā bhavet |

cālanaṁ mālamantreṇa ghaṭāntarena [k kh: ghaḍharantena g: ”] kārayet | 5 II
“The mantrin should cook the caru with milk from a cow of whom no calf has died

(amṛtavatsayā = amṛtavaisāyāḥ) usig litle millet-grains, O goddess, or wald rice or fox-tai
millet, ṣaṣṭi or śāli, o goddess, or with barley, wheat and rice, using (a vessel of) copper, gold,

silver or clay. Translation by Goodall (2OI5: p. 262)

“(The vessel should be) very strong, without cracks, and smooth. It should be washed
with the root Mantra. Taking a burning coal from Śiva’s fire, it should be heated inside and

outside. Having protected (it with Mantras), the contented (officiant) should cook (the caru) with

that on Śivas fire. Then the pot, smeared with clanfied butter, filled with milk should be placed in

the middle of the fire in such a way that it does not move at all. (When cooking the contents,) it

should be stirred with the root Mantra within the jar.' TS 9/55-57

The following is an example of the Kaula procedure for the use and preparation of the

caru. It is a summary of ‘the sūtra concerning the Sacrifice of the Victim which is a part of the

Prescription concerning the Sacrificial Pap (carukavidhāne paśuyāgavidhisūtram) found in
chapter three of the Yogakhaṇḍa of the Manthānabhairavatantra.

‘The god asks about the practice (sādhana) that is not harmful to living beings. The

goddess goes on to talk again about the ritual offerng of meat, wine and caru. She begins by

saying that ‘one should take what should not be taken — there is no defect ....' One should take it

up in accord with the sequence (of the ritual procedure) in order to (prepare and consume the)
caruka and (make) the bali offering. (141cd-144)
One should fashion a Circle 1n a solitary place with cow dung mixed with liquor (ali).

One should make the encompassing circle (vrttaka) the measure of a handspan (hastamātra). It

should be fashioned with a burning coal (artgara). The sequence of the Five Seeds 1s present there

along with the Seven Peaks. The Six of Restraint (nigrahasaṭka) is also present there and is

worshipped with the six substances. One should bring a sacrificial animal (pasu) there and (its
vital) constituents (dhātu) should be offered to the goddess. Once having placed the bone and

meat, and the blood is also present 1n the fire, one should offer the earthen fat (meda). (The

TANTRĀḶŌOKA

AII the rites for the preparation of the sacrificial pap should be performed
in association with the Mantra of the Heart (SAUḤ).
Then, the teacher lays hold of the sacrificial pap, and he fills the
large or little ladle with (melted) clarified butter, according to whether (the
aim is the attainment of) worldly benefits or liberation. As he does so he

recites, one by one, the Mantras of the two triads of the gods and the
energies and, as a seventh, the Mātṛsadbhāva. He should (then) offer the
rest of the butter into the fire with the syllable of nectar, that is, SVĀ, and

following couple of lines are very corrupt) ... one should make the deposition (sannyāsa) there
with the Sun and Moon ... That livng being should be transferred into the livng being within
one's own body and of the adept (sādhaka). Then one should brng lghted incense and punfy it
with Caṇḍikā's Weapon. All of that is the same as (sāmānya) as caru and should be looked after
with effort. (145-150)
One should offer the guardian of the Dāmara field bali in the southwest. One should
establish the aforementioned caru with that pure substance. There is no defect there. One acquires
the fuit of 10 million sacrifices. The caruka, fire offering, and Kaulika placing of the bali should
be done in accord with the view of the scripture, otherwise one goes to hell. One should offer an
auspicious ram (aja) in the Wheel, a gathering of the Rule, or on the road. One should offer the
skun and bones and whatever (else?). One should take the first drop that falls with the right hand.
One should place sesame seed with musk (rōocana) with three (?) Bengali madders (munda). The
powerful and brave one should punfy all the gods. (Thus) he is never subject to evil magic
(nigraha), and cruel and foul (influences) flee (from him). He who slays a yictim anywhere

without observing this sacrifice does not get the accomplishment of ether this or the other world.

He who kills a boy by mistake as a bali offering gets no fiuit thereby and what (good) work he
may have done before 1s destroyed. (I51-159ab)
The merit accrued by the disciple who drinks Soma in the Age of Stfe is acquired by
merely cating (the caru) īn front of the Krama. Just by eating it, one acquires both enjoyment and
liberation. One acquires endless mert and is praised by one's relatives. The various kinds of
caruka should not be given to Taāntrikas and should always be kept hudden, like riches from
thieves. Otherwise, there is no success and no tradition (sampradāya).’ (159cd-165ab)
(Here it seems that Tāntrikas are those who belong to the Tantric sects that do not perform
animal sacrifices and accept the consequent consumption of the sacrificial meat.)

Abhinava lists a number of ways the teacher imparts initiaton which is immediately
liberating above in 13/227cd-229ab. Amongst them is the consumption of caru.
71 Cf. MV 8/121ab hṛdayena caroḥ sidáhir yājñikaiḥ kṣīrataṇḍulaiḥ ḷ
‘The sacrificial pap is (prepared) successfully with sacnfictal rice boiled in milk and
(the utterance of the) mantra of the Heart (whule it cooks).”

”1 Read mantrāṇāṁ for yantrānāṁ.

! As elsewhere, I take Mātṛsadbhāva to be HSHRPHREMṀ, which is extracted 1n MV 8/39-40ab;
see below, 30/47-51. See above 15/331cd-332, note 533. The Mantra of the Heart (irdayabīja) is
the name of the syllable SAUH. The MV enjoins that the single oblations of caru are made with
the Mantra of the Heart (SAUH). For the final full oblatton, Abhinava adds a ‘seventh’ to the sx
mantras of the Trīka goddesses and their Bhairavas. This is Mātṛsadbhāva, which is Kālī's seed
syllable. Here, agamn, in this way, as in other places, 1t marks the culmination of worshup as that of
the goddess Kālī. Thus, Abhinava implicitly connects to the teaching of the M that enyoms that
seven Mantras should be used for the offering. But having done that, he fills out the detals
integrating the Trika tnad of goddess and their three Bhairavas with Mātrsadbhāva, i e ,

Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī as the seventh deity above. Abhinava is supported by the MV, which says the
caru should be divided into seven portions, although admittedly it does not direct their offering to
this group of seven. There is no evidence in the quotations drawn from the Triśirobhairava that it
1ntegrated Kālī into its teachings as the culmination ofthe Trika triad. One wonders whether ths
1s Abhinava’s manipulation or whether he is drawing from another scriptural source.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


onto the sacrificial pap with (the syllable of) fire, that is, HĀ repeatedly.
(439-443) (436cd-441ab)

‘Then’ʼ, that is, after the libation. ‘On which the Mantras have not

(yet) been depositedʼ. As is said:

‘The liquid (offerings) along with the sacrificial pap and rice cakes
(puroḍāśa) are the auspicious (śiva) oblation (offered) into the fire that,
purified with the five sacraments (saṁskāra), is transcendental Śiva,”" who has
been invoked (and is present).

Thus, it is said there that it is a pure fire. (The sacrificial pap) ‘should
be prepared’ by the teacher himself. (The pap can be prepared by the disciples)
‘at the same tīme as (the teacher makes) the offering to the fireʼ, because the
disciples are not occupied with the offering to the fire etc. ‘“Kaula substances
(vīradravya) are such things as wine.' The ‘ordinary ones’ are such things as

milk and rice. (The substances may be) ‘as desired’, that is, either Kaula or

otherwise. ‘AI the ritesʼ include the taking up of the cooking pot (sthālī) etc.,
their_consecration with Mantras, and stirring (the preparation) with a ladle.

(SVĀ) is ‘the syllable of nectar’ʼ, because (the phonemes) S and V are
nourishing. (HĀ) is ‘(the syllable of) fire’, because (the phoneme) H

(represents) the perceiver, as it denotes Śiva. The sense (of saying) ‘repeatedly°
is that the procedure (prayoga) should be done in this way with each offering to
the fire. In this way, SVĀ is (deposited) onto the fire. This is the lunar aspect.

Here Abhinava 1s referring to saipātahoma ‘a sacṅfice of the remnant’, also just called

saṁpātaḥ below in 15/444a (442c). Concerning this rite 1n which a part of the clarified butter is

made to fall on the sacnfical pap, see MT kriyāpāda 7/44-45 and ŚSP vol. 2, p. 86. Sanderson

(2007b: 274 note 137) explains: ‘In Tantrc practice the officiant pours the first part of each
oblation of melted butter from the ladle (sruvaḥ) into the fire as he utters the SVĀ of SVĀHĀ that
closes the Mantra in the case of oblations, and then he utters the HĀ while he pours the rest
(ājyaśeṣaḥ) onto whatever is to be empowered (saṁskārya-). This 1s done first with the rootMantra and then with its ancillanes. He refers to SVT 3/153. māūlamantram samuccārya svā ity

agnau prapātayet | het śiṣyasya śiraṣi sampātaḥ śivacoditaḥ l| Having uttered the root-Mantra
(saying) SVĀ cast (the oblation) 1nto the fire and with HĀ the remnant (is made to fall) (saṁṅpāta)

on the disciple's head impelled by Śiva.’ Sanderson cites a passage from the Kalādīksāpaddhat
(Ī. 60v-61r4): niṣkaleṉa tadaigavaktrai
ca ekaikayāhutyā sampātaṁ kuryāt, yathā: OM HŪṀ
SAṀPĀTAṀ KAROMI SVĀ ity agnau HĀ úúi carau. evam anyat | punaḥ niṣkalenāṣṭottaraśataṁ

japtvã parāmr̥tam anusmaran carav ājyāhutṁṁ kṣiped ity agnīṣomasomasomatāvyāptaś carur
bhavet | iti caruṣādhanam |
‘(The offering of) the remnant (sarpāta) should be made with the uskala Mantra (of
the deity) along with its 1mbs and faces with each single oblation thus: OṂ HŪM SAMPĀTAM

KAROMI SVĀ into the fire and HĀ into the sacrificial pap (caru) and in the same way (anything)
else. Then again, having repeated Mantra with niṣkala 108 tmes, recollecting the supreme nectar,
cast the oblation of clarfied butter into the sacrificial pap. In this way the sacrificial pap will be
pervaded by the Fire and Moon and the lunar essence of the moon (somasomatā). Ths 1s the

manner of preparing the sacriicial pap.’

According Monier-Williams, a puroḍāśa is ‘a mass of ground rice rounded into a kind of cake

usually divided into pieces, placed on receptacles and offered as an oblation in fire.

2" Read anāśritaśive for anāḥrtaśive (Th reads: anāhūtaśive). The variant reading in MS Th
suggests the translation ‘Siva to whom oblations have not been offered
Read sūrādi- for sārādi-.

TANTRĀLOKA

HĀ is deposited into the sacrificial pap, which is the Moon, and so is the fiery
aspect, in such a way that both together assume the nature of Fire and Moon
(agnīṣoma). As (is said) in the Veda (śruti): ‘Indeed, he who offers that oblation
with the Fire and Moon, that becomes nectar for him.”

Thus, he says:


TrSĀĪĪSTFHTAT-ĀṬRTATTGTṬĀTH¥TT: |

TTṚTATTTĀĪRṬTT-ĀTCA TĪT |I 62% 11
bhojyabhojakacarvagnyor ittham ekānusandhitaḥ |
svāhāpratyavamarśāt syāt samantrād advaāyaṁ param || 444 ||
(The fruit of) the single congruous connection (ekānusandhi) in this
way of the sacrificial pap and the fire, that are the food (of objectivity) and
the eater of food (who is theperceiver), brought about by the reflective
awareness (focused) on SVAHA along with the Mantra, is supreme

nonduality. (444) (441cd-442ab)

‘Supreme nonduality’ (is realized) by the attainment of the oneness of
the Fire (of the subject) and the Moon (of the object).
Surely (one may ask), what has been stated in this way is just the
equality (of nature) (sāmya) of the object of enjoyment and the enjoyer, (but)
what is that? With this doubt in mind, he says:

JTa TH ṃR. īr Ĩ

ār-T: 1| vx-4 1|

eṣa saṁpātasaṁskāraś caror bhoktā hy adhiṣṭhitaḥ |

bhogyasya paramaṁ sāraṁ bhogyaṁ narnarti yatnataḥ || 445 II
This is the (empowering) purification that comes about by the

oblation (which is the ‘falling together’ of the clarified butter into the fire
and onto the sacrificial pap) (saṁpātasaṁskāra). He who eats the
sacrificial pap (i.e., the subject) is the (fundamental) sustaining state (of the

rite) (adhiṣṭhiti), and so is the supreme essence of (what is) eaten (i.e., the
object). (t is due to him, thus inwardly sustained and sustaining, that) the
eaten (i.e., objectivity) (vibrates, as if) dancing intensely (narnarti) without

any effort (at all). (445) (442cd-443ab)

(He who eats the sacrificial pap is) ‘the supreme essence’ (of what is
eaten), because (the object of enjoyment) which is eaten rests within (the
perceiver, who is) the one who eats (it). Thus, it is said that (conversely, the
eaten vibrates, as if) ‘dancing intensely (narnarti)’, that is, it pulses radiantly

This 1s more correctly called saṁpātahoma, concerning which, see above note 15,719.
" follow Gnoli in emending adhiṣṭhitaḥ to adhiṣṭhtiḥ, and yatnataḥ for ayatnatah.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


as the very nature of the arousal (of manifestation out of the subjectivity of
consciousnesS).

He (now) illustrates the (etymological) meaning of the term ‘equal fall’

(saṁpāta).

ṬHHGITTHTĪCTTTTI ĪTGĀHTJAT |

ūTITITTGTTSITJṬ-ĀTĪ || `5, ||
samam ekānuṣandhānāt pātato bhoktṛbhogyayoḥ |
anyonyasya ca saṁpātāt saṅgamāc cettham ucyate || 446 ||
(This sacrament is called an ‘equal fall’,) because the eater (i.e., the
perceiver) and the eaten (i.e., the perceived) fall (pāta) (i.e., are experienced
simultaneously) together, due to the single (synthetic) contemplation

(ekānusandhāna) (of both of them) equally (samam) (together). Again, it
is called this because by mutually falling (that is, combining) together they

come together.” (446) (443cd-444ab)

Here in this case, the sense of their existing together at the same time

means that (subject and object) are parts (of single whole). The sense of (their)

coming together means that (subject and object) are an assemblage (samudāya).
He divides the sacrificial pap that has been purified in this way into six
(as follows).
Offering of the Sacrificial Pap and More to
the Implements and the Disciples

TIHI-T| TT-̄Tftz̄A fJIṚIHTRJ ||/<.9 1|

vīṝPcṁTārṁītzztaīT-kq [ṅāxz ātfē: 1|/#%¢ 11
There are two streams of clarified butter. One falls into the fire, which represents the perceiver.

The other falls onto the sacrificial pap, that represents the object. The former is the one who eats,
and the latter is the food he eats. Their fall together represents the congruity that links subject and
object in a common perception with two aspects. One is directed at the subject and the other at the
object, assessing their nature, it connects them together. The term anusandhāna has a double
meaning. One is ‘assessment’ or ‘investigation’. As a phase in the cognitive process, it is the stage
in which the specific empirical nature of the object is determined. As a form of meditation, it is
the contemplation of reality principles or their representations with the intention of ascertaining

their true nature directly. Both cases involve differentiating the entity which is the object of
attention as well as connecting or relating to others. The latter is anusandhāna, ‘investigating /
contemplating and connecting together.” A well-known example of the use of the term in this
sense is Śivasūtra 1/6: śakticakrānusandhāne viśvasaṁhāraḥ, ʻby contemplating / fusing together
the configurations of energies the universe is withdrawn.’” In this case the two streams of clarified
butter representing the perceiver and the perceived flow together, unified by a single anusandhāna
of both, so that they are experienced as one.

7 Read anyonyasya for anyo ‘nyatra.

TANTRĀLOKA

āīṝ dāT= a =- aVHTSĪTT |
sthaṇḍile kumbhakarkaryor bhāgaṁ bhāgaṁ nivedayet |
bhāgenāgnau mantratṛptir dvayaṁ Śiṣyātmanor atha || 447 |I
itthaṁ vihitakartavyo vijñāpyeśaṁ tadīritaḥ |
śaktipātakramāc chiṣyān saṁskartuṁ niḥsared bahiḥ || 448 ||
tatraiṣāṁ pañcagavyaṁ ca caruṁ daśanamãrjanam |
(Now the teacher) should offer a part (of the pap) to the sacrificial
surface, to the large jar and to the small jar (kakarī). The Mantras (present
in the fire) are satisfied by one part (offered) to the fire. Two (are offered,
one each) to the disciple and himself. In this way, he should do what is

enjoined and, once having made the (appropriate) declaration to the

Lord, (the teacher,) impelled by (Śiva), should go outside to purify (his)

disciples, according to the (intensity) of the descent of the power (of grace
they have received). There, (in the open,) he should give them the five

products of the cow, the sacrificial pap, and (a stick) to clean the teeth.
(447-449ab) (444cd-446)

And it is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):


‘The sacrificial pap is (prepared) successfully with sacrificial rice boiled

in milk, and (the utterance of the) mantra of the Heart (while it cooks). (Then)

the oblation (saṁpāta) is offered with (the utterance of) seven mantras, and

(the sacrificial pap) is then divided into six (equal) portions. (These are offered)
equally to Śiva, the fire, the teacher and disciples, and to the small (vārdhānī)

and large jars (kumbha).””

‘Once having made the (appropriate) declaration’ (concerning this,
it is said in the Mālinīvijayottara);:
“You yourself, O Supreme Lord, (have ordained) me a teacher by
(Your) command (ājñā). (These are my) disciples who, impelled by SŚiva’s
power, deserve to be graced by You, such are they who are present (here), grace

them, having entered my body, so that being Your equal (I may act thus!)””

(Then) ‘(the teacher) is impelled by (Śiva)ʼ, who says (in the

scriptures), `“do this”. ‘There’ outside (in the open), he should give (them the
sacrificial pap).
” The declaration is taken from MV 9/37-38 and is transcribed by Abhinavagupta below in
16/74-76.

” According to TĀ 15/439 (436cd) ff., these Mantras are those of the three goddesses, the three
Saktis and Mātṛsadbhāva.
” MV 8/121-122ab.

MV 9/37-38. Lines 37-38ab are quoted literally below as TĀ 16/74ab and 75. The following
line is expanded as TA 16/76.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


The Śtick for the Teeth (dantakaṣṭha)

Tīaāi Tīaā: Ṃj?: ṀTHHHHIVTATATTTTT: II/#38, 11

TJTS TTHRIHĪSATYT Tq |

tasya pātaḥ śubhaḥ prācīsaumyaiśāpyordhvadiggataḥ || 449 ||

aśubho ʻnyatra tatrāstrahomo ‘py aṣṭaśataṁ bhavet |

It is auspicious for that (stick) to fall to the east, north, northeast,
west or vertically (ārdhvadik). It is inauspicious (if it falls) elsewhere. There
(in that case) also, one hundred and eight oblations should be (offered) with

the Weapon.” (449cd-450ab)

‘That’ is (the stick) to clean the teeth. ‘There’, when it is inauspicious.

That is said (in the scriptures, where we read):


‘If (the stick) stands (straight) facing upwards, he will get a kingdom
and liberation, (but if) it faces down, deathwards, death; (and so in order to
avoid that,) he should make a hundred oblations with (the Mantra of) the heart.
(If it falls) in the east, (he will achieve) complete success in Yoga. (If it falls) in

the southeast, that indicates disease, in the south there will be death, in the
southwest (much) quarrelling, in the west, much wealth, in the northwest (he

will be) ousted (by the enemy), in the north, he will obtain (yogic and magical)
accomplishment (siddhi), and in the area of the northeast, liberation.”

The purification (saṁskāra) of the teeth has been taught in this way.

The Final Purification (antasaṅṁskriyā)
The Vision of the Deities in the Maṇḍala

hF'rEkEeccE-FccF. T-TJT I| “4o II

srṝ-aāēēzārqāraatēai f=r̃ 1
TTÑ-TTRGHHJTĪRTPaTT TṬE: || #42 11

rava JīT=aīṛī 3vavā sṝj; |

”" This is a small stik made of soft wood about the size of the little finger used to clean the teeth.

See ŚSP 1/11-17 (vol. 1, pp. 8-13). The same rite of the stick 1s also performed by Tantric

Buddhiṣṭs (see for example, Gnoli-Orofino 1994: 160).
15/449cd-450ab (447) is MV 8/123. MV reads: tatrāpi homo ‘ṣṭaśatiko bhavet — ‘there (in that
case) also, the oblations should be one hundred and eight’, for tatrāṣtrahomo 'py aṣṭaśatam
bhavet — There (in that case) also one hundred and eight oblations should be (offered) with the
Weaponʼ.

” According to Jayaratha, the purpose of this rite 1s to make the Mantras penetrate the disciples.

TANTRĀLOKA

netramantritasadvastrabaddhanetrān acañcalān || 450 ||
ananyahṛdayībhūtān balād itthaṁ nirodhataḥ |
muktāramādikuṣumasaṁpūrṇāñjalikān guruḥ || 451 1|

praveśya sthaṇḍilopāgra upaveśyaiva jānubhiḥ |
prakṣepayed añjaliṁ taṁ taiḥ śiṣyair bhāvitātmabhiḥ || 452 ||
añjali punar āpūrya teṣāṁ lāghavataḥ paṭam |
dṛśor nivārayet so ‘pi śiṣyo jhaṭiti paśyati || 453 ||
(The disciples) are blindfold (by the teacher) with a good cloth
consecrated (rnantrita) with (the Mantra of) the Eye. (Their power of sight)
arrested in this way by force, (they do) not fidget, and (their) attention is
not directed to anything else.™ (Their) cupped hands filled with flowers,
pearls, gems and the like, the teacher introduces them into the front of the
sacrificial surface, and then, making them kneel, (the teacher) should throw
(his) handful of flowers (onto the sacrificial surface) along with those

purified disciples.” After having filled their hands again (with flowers), he

should remove the blindfold quickly from the (disciple’s) eyes (so that) he

sees (the Maṇḍala) all of a sudden. (450cd-453) (448-451ab)

‘Those are (the disciples) who have been introduced into (the

sacrificial area) in this way, and are those who are to do what needs to be done.

The blindfold is amongst the standard set of ritual implements (29/75-77). The consecrated

blindfold is in itself so powerful that even touching it may induce possession by the deity (āveśa)
(29/196-197ab). There are several occasions for a disc1ple to be blindfolded apart from this one.
These 1nclude the initiatory rite of placing Śiva’s Hand on his head. Another one is that 1n which
he is given his name as an initiate. This is selected according to where a flower he casts falls
randomly on a specially prepared diagram (see 29/187-191cd) Generally, the bhndfold is

empowered, as in this case, with the Mantra of the Eye. This is also so 1n the naming ceremony
taught in the SvT:

‘It is proper that the viewing of the maṇḍala should be by (the disciple) who is
(imtially) blindfolded, so (that he may) assume a state of concentration on the Lord by quelling

the outer flow of the senses. Thus, it 1s said:

Once the cloth (for the blindfold) has been sprmmkled with water, it should be enveloped
with (the mantra of) the Armor. Worship it with scent and flowers etc. and consecrate it with
Bhairava’s Mantra. Once having bound the eye with (the Mantra of) the Eye. . . . SvT 4/60cd-61a

(Kṣemarāja) ‘once having bound the eye’, that 1s, (the sense of sight) that heralds the
flow of all the senses, (once) consecrated with (the Mantra of the Eye). (The blindfoldng of the
eyes) is preceded by the utterance of the Mantra of the Eye. (Having done that, the teacher)
‘should place a flower in the disciple’s handʼ. (4/61d)

” This is the rite of maṇḍaladarśana, that marks the liberating chmax of the rte of intiaton

Although this rite is generally an essential part of the conclusion of the procedure for the common
initiation, it is not found in the MV. Accordingly, Abhinava draws it from some other source.
The disciple is similarly blindfolded for the rite in which he is allotted a Kuḷa. This is

decided by where flowers he releases from his hand happens to drop. See below, 29/187cd-191,
which is largely drawn from MV 11/17cd-22 See there and notes for details.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


(The blindfold is removed) ‘quickly, in such a way that he sees the sacrificial
surface all ofa sudden. This is the (overall) sense.


So, what happens to him in this way? With this doubt in mind, he says:

S

iGEKERIĪE=42ĪEEICIEETĀETRATAHI
jhatity ālokite māntraprabhāvollāsite sthale |
tadāveśavaśāṁc chiṣyas tanmayatvaṁ prapadyate || 454 ||
At the sudden sight of the sacrificial ground (i.e., the Maṇḍala)
springing forth radiantly (ullāsita) with the power of the Mantras
(projected onto it), by virtue of the penetration (āveśa) of their (power), the
disciple attains a state of oneness (tanmaya) (with it). (454) (451cd-452ab)
He induces one to take this (teaching) to heart by presenting an
example.

yathā hi raktahṛdayas tāṁs tān kāntāguṇān svayam |
paśyaty evaṁ śaktipātasaṁskṛto mantrasannidhim || 455 ||

Just as one who is in love (raktahṛdaya)“ sees by himself

(spontaneously each of the many) virtues of the beloved, so does one
purified by a descent of the power (of grace) see in this way the presence of
Mantras (in the Maṇḍala). (455) (452cd-453ab)

(He sees this) ‘by himself’, with no need at all of another means, for if
that were s0, he would not have that vision (of reality) (darśana).
Surely (one may ask), the qualities of the beloved, such as (her) beauty,

are perceptible. One who is in love can see them. Mantras, however, are not
perceptible, even if they are close by, so how can they become the objects of the
senses of sight and the rest, that perceive inferior things? With this doubt in

mind, he says:

TTTA-TGÇĀ WTITT STRT AITĀTT |I `54E, 1I
cakṣurādīndriyāṇāṁ hi sahakāriṇi tādṛśe |
saty atyantamadṛṣṭe prāg api jāyeta yogyatā || 456 ||
” A raktahr̥daya is one ‘whose heart is attached (rakta) (to his beloved) or ‘whose heart 1s dye

(wath love).

TANTRĀLOKA

When such an aid to sight and the other senses is present, they

become fit (to perceive) even what was previously totally invisible.
(453cd-454ab)

‘When such an aid to sight and the other senses is presentʼ, that is, a
descent of the power (of grace), ‘they become fit’, and it becomes possible for
them ‘(to perceive) even what was previously totally invisible’. The meaning
is that (they become fit to operate) as instruments of the act of perception in the
case of Mantras and the like, although they are not the objects of conceptual
knowledge, because there is no latent trace of (their being previously)
experienced.

says:

What is the authority here (for this view)? With this doubt in mind, he

ax fē fāzzzī- Ġā īd, mō |
sfcrāfē ā vazāṁ fāg;: ahreaātsī 1| -ṣu 1
kṛtaprajñā hi vinyastamantraṁ dehaṁ jalaṁ sthalam |
pratimādi ca paśyanto viduḥ sāṁnidhyasaṁnidhī || 457 |I
Those whose insight is developed (kṛtaprajñā), observing a body,
water, a place, an icon and the like onto which Mantras have been
deposited, know (immediately) whether (the Mantra deity is) present or

not. (457) (454cd-455ab)

He says (the following) to those who deny even their own insight (that

they have) in this way.

ITT-TQTĪÉĪRRTGAfRaT: |

TRṬTĪTĪT] TTĪRTRATTTRGĀTTĨ: || 5

nyastamantrāṁśusubhagāt kiñcidbhūtādimudritāḥ |
trasyantīveti tat tac cidakṣais tatsahakāribhiḥ || 458 II
(But) those who are afflicted (mudrita) by some ghosts or the like
are gripped, as it were, by fear, because (the teacher) is beautiful, (shining
radiantly) with the rays of the Mantras deposited (on his body). Thus, one
can perceive their presence or absence very well by means of the senses
assisted (by a descent of the power of grace). (458) (455cd-456ab)
People who are ‘afflicted by some ghosts or the like’ are seen in (this)
world to be ‘gripped, as it were, by fear’ of the teacher etc., because of the
good fortune (and grace) of the radiant energy that has been revealed (in him)
by the deposition of Mantras (onto his body). In this way, the senses that have
been assisted by that descent of the power (of grace) and the like, the presence
or absence of each one is thus (known immediately,) as is the consciousness by


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


(its own) awareness. With this much, the final purification (sarskāra), which
is that of the penetration (of the power) of Mantra (nantrāveśa) (into the

disciple), has been taught.

Now he expounds the rite of Śiva’s Hand.
”The Initiation by Means of Śiva’s Hand (Śśivahastavidhi)

TT JNgHTTTTI TTTTĀ II #uR 11

dTĪTI
TĪR} TṬ-Taāīaā TāTTq I|ē0 1|
tataḥ sa dakṣiṇe haste dīptaṁ sarvādhvapiūritam |

mantracakraṁ yajed vāmapāṇinā pāśadāhakam || 459 II

taṁ śiṣyasya karaṁ mūrádhni dehanyastādhvasaṁtateḥ |
nyasyet krameṇa sarvāṅgaṁ tenaivāsya ca saṅṁspṛśet || 460 ||
” Read ctcetanavad evam for cit cetanavad evarh.
The teacher transforms his hand into Śiva’s hand (śivahasta) by projecting upon it the main,
most powerful mantras of the tradition. The impositton onto the disciple’s head of Śiva’s hand to

sever his bonds and thus initiate him is a procedure that goes back to pre-Āgamic Pāśupata
Śaivism and appears in the earliest known Śaiva Āgama, the Niśvāsatantvasaṁhitā. Goodall

(2015: 279-280) explains: ‘Śivahastam refers to the guru’s layung of his hand, on which the
priṇcipal mantras have been installed, on the initiand’s head. Thts appears to have been the
defining moment in Lākula (Pāśupata) initiation as described mn the Niśvāsamukha (Sanderson
2006: 188-190) and became in later Saiddhāntika texts the culminating moment in the first

initiation, the samayadīkṣā, whch introduces the neophyte 1nto the religion and obliges them to
follow its rules (samaya) but does not confer liberation, for which another mnitatton, nirvānadīkṣā,

is required.’
The imposition of Śiva’'s Hand is commonly followed by the cutting of a thread, which

induces the severing of the initiand's fetters. This is taught in the earliest Siddhāntāgama, the
NTS, in Mūlasūtra 4/14: (Then follow) the supenmpoiton (of mantras onto the hand), the

laying hold of the discple, the (laying of the guru’s) Śiva-hand (upon the head of the initiand),

and the cutting of the (thread embodying the) bonds. All these acts should be performed with the
five Brahmamantras.' (Goodall 2015: 279) The thread 1s then burnt.

In some, cases, the topknot of the disciple is severed, as is prescribed in the

Svāyambhuva-sūtrasaṁgraha 13/11: ‘At the end of the homa, he should cut off the (disciple’s)
topknot (and offer 1t to the fire, and) then, in due order, he should offer a full oblation. One who
(as descrnbed above) has received the hand of Śiva 1s called 1n this system a samayin.’ (Goodall
2015: 283)

Note that the Śivahasta taught in the Kularatnamālā bṅngs about mmmediate realīzation

(see 29/192cd-194) Goodall 2015 289: ‘Sanderson has shown (2006:188-193), the initiauon
structure in the Niśvāsa must derive from the Lākulas described mn Niśvāsamukha 4 . . . Clearly 1t

involved the laying of the Śtvahasta upon the disciple and then meditation upon the Lākula
cosmography, coupled with some action’ Sanderson 2006: 188: ‘The officiant we are told here,
must meditate on the cosmic hierarchy, make that hierarchy the object of an action unfortunately

lost in a lacuna caused by damage of the manuscript, and then nitiate the candidate through what

the text calls the descent of the word atha (athaśabdanipātaḥ)˚” See Goodall 2015: 294-295. lbid.
‘the scant Lākula material leaves us in doubt about whether niuatton is essenually the
bestowal of the Śivahasta, the meditation upon the prakriyā [cosmic order] or the ‘descent of the
word atha’.

TANTRĀLOKA

Then (the teacher) should worship on his right hand, by means of
the left, the wheel of Mantras, energized (dīpta) and full of all the Paths,

that burn up all the fetters. (He should) place that hand on the head of (his)
disciple, onto whose body the series of paths have been deposited, and he
should deposit in due order (the Mantra) on each limb (of his body), and

touch it with that same (hand). (459-460) (456cd-458ab)

Surely (one may ask), nothing is said in this regard in the
Mālinīvijayottara. So where has this (ritual procedure) been taken from? With
this doubt in mind, he says:

īd ftraēxā
gaā fsftaā 1 2 1
uktaṁ dīkṣottare caitaj jvālāsaṁpātaśobhinā |
dattena śivahastena samayī sa vidhīyate || 461 1|
sāyujyam īśvare tattve jīvato ‘dhītiyogyatā |
And (so) this is said in the Dīkṣottara, (where we read that) the
disciple becomes a regular initiate (samayin) when (the teacher) has given
(and laid upon him) Śiva’s hand, beautiful with the descent (saṁpāta) of the
flames (of the fire of Mantra). He is united, while he is still alive, with the
Iśvara principle, and is (rendered) fit to study (the scriptures). (461-

462ab) (458cd-459)

15/462cd-463 (458cd-459) is a condensed paraphrase of Dīkṣottara 7/108-11 lab. This passage
is found in IFP T 17B p. 907 and IFP T 127 p. 4. Quoted and edited from the latter by Goodall
1998: xIī n. 96. However, IFP T 17B is more complete and correct. The variants there 1n this
passage are labelled B. An electronic transcript of it can be downloaded from the Muktabodha
site. The passage reads:
jvālāmālākalākāraṁ dhyātvā devaṁṅ maheśvari |
dhyātvā devaṁ maheśānaṁ bhīūmimadhye (B: dhya to madhye missiṅg) tu tatvavit || 108 II
puṇyapāpaṁ dahet tasya dhyātvā deham na saṁśayaḥ |
evaṁkṛte tato devi śivahasteti sa smṛtaḥ (B: -hastena saṁsmṛtaḥ) l| 109 |ḷ
śivahastapradānena samayī sa vidhīyate (B: sarvadhīyate) |
anena vidhinā dev kuryāt tasyāpy anugraham | 1 10 |lī
sāyujyaṃ īśvare tatve bhavate (B: bhavante) nātra ṣaṁśayaḥ |
‘O Maheśvarī, having meditated on the god whose form is a blazing garland of energies,
once (the teacher who) knows reality has meditated on the god Maheśāna in the middle of the
Earth, hss merit and sin is burt away without a doubt by having (thus) meditated (on his) body
(108-109ab)
Then, O goddess, once this has been done, (the teacher’s hand) 1s considered to be
Śiva’s Hand. By giving Śiva's Hand (and laying 1t upon him, the disciple) should be made a
regular initiate (samayin). O goddess, by means of thss procedure, grace him also. Without a doubt
(he is) conjoined (in this way) to the Īśvara principle.' Dīkṣottara 7/108-11 ab
Note that in the Dīkṣottara, the imposition of Śiva’s Hand on the disciple’s head makes
him a regular mitiate (samayin). Abhinava has chosen the procedure taught in the Devyāyāmala


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


(Śiva’s Hand is beautiful with) ‘the descent of the flames (of the fire
of Mantra), because of the (close) presence of the radiant energy of Mantra.
That is said (in the Śvacchandatantra, where we read): “Having meditated on
the All-pervasive Lord in Siva’s Hand and the aggregate of Mantra well and

intensely aflame.’ The ‘Īśvara’ (principle) is located above the principle of
(Pure) Knowledge. It is certainly not (as some maintain) Kālāgnirudra, which is

located below the Earth principle, because it is not seen to be such in the

scriptures. (Kṣemarāja,) the author of the uddyota (commentary on the
Svacchandatantra,) has laboured here (in his commentary on this passage to
counter this mistaken conception). Thus one should consider (for oneself)

what is the use of that discussion here (in this regard). The ‘study’ (of the
scriptures) is (their systematic) study. That is said (in the Svacchandatantra,

where we read):

“The regular initiate (samayin) who has been purified (saṁskṛta) in this
way is fit to utter the word (of the scriptures), so too to hear (it), study (it), offer

oblations and also worship etc. He whose soul is completely pure, by virtue of
right conduct (caryā) and meditation, attains the Lord’s plane.”

descrubed next as the regular, basic initiation. The reason for this 1s clear enough. According to the
latter, Trika Mantras and deities are projected onto the teacher’s hand. As the Dīkṣottara 1s not a

Trika Tantra, Abhmava could have simply ignored it, but he chooses 1nstead to present the
procedure of Śiva’s Hand there to serve first as a preliminary to the imposition that takes the

initiand up to the level of Iśvara. The Trika procedure taught in the Devyāyāmala cauṣes him to

rise all the way to a state of conjunction (sāyujya) with Śiva, and so completes the regular
initaatton (samayadīkṣā). Abhīnava then continues on to the other initiations, surprisingly,
reserving the highest type of initiaton —— the one which bestows immediate extinction of the

fettered state (sadyonirvāṇadīkṣā) — to the procedure taught in the Dīkṣotara. Does this mean that

this common, basic initiation, meant for those who aspired to liberation, was not found, or at least,
not described in detail, in Trika Tantras? The PT (v 25-26) does refer to it, but there it is in

relaton to the utterance of SAUḤ. The Spandakārikā (v 32), probably following suit, after PT 19
presents it as a flash of direct realisation that does not require outer ritual.

SṬ 3/142ab.

Read tathā śruter for tathāśruter.

7 See note just below, where the passage from the commentary on SvT 4/78-79ab 1s translated.

Read tathava ca for tathaivaca.

ṢVT 4/78-79ab.
samayī saṁskrto hy evarī...……....

evam iti jātyuddáhāradvijatvarudrāmśāpattibhīḥ
maryādāvartanam asyāstīti krtvā | yadāha ----

samayī

samayaḥ

pārameśaśāstra-

....-..vvācaṉe 'syārhatā bhavet |

śravaṇe ʻdhyayane home pūyanādau tathaiva ca l| 4-78 I
vācanam buddhyādyārohāyāvartanam, śravanam arthāvabodhaḥ, adhyayanam
vedavatsatatapātha āgamagranthasya, ādiśabdena japadhyānādayaḥ 1| 78 |
ittham ayaṁ samayī ----

caryādhyānaviśuddhātmā labhate padam aiśvaram |

caryādhyānābhyāṁ samayapālanayogābhyāsābhyām eva viśuddáha āmā yasya | dīkṣayā hi

asyādhvaśuddhiyoyanena vinā īśvarayogayogyataivāhiteti tadyogād evāsya pāśaśuddhāv
īśvarapadāptiḥ | ataś ca yat kaścad īśvaratattvayojitasyāsya putrakādidīkṣāyām adharapada-

Śśodhanam na yuktam iti Tśvarapadam ----

sśuddhabhāvasthútasyāsya kālarudraṁ nidhāpayet |

TANTRĀLOKA

That is not only taught here (in the Dīkṣottara), but also elsewhere.


Thus, he says:


Ṣaṁaām Çṝṁ=-T-dTATIṀ |I ē2 11
T ʻÑTGTTYTTĪTRTRT |
āIaāTṀ ṀŪdTḤf TSTB TT | #ē3 11

SNTTGṀSTIĪ JIĪTṬJTTATĪTI |
fafrī q afkzḍṁ ūç aaī sraq || ē; 1|
T ÑZIḺIJTṢ; šB] 3ftzrrfrīcz ̃ |

afe: | x |
rā ftrēx gāzī vrafṝ aa7 1
iti katranavākyānusāreṇa kālāgnidhāma vā (maiva) ity avocat, tad asat, samayino yojanikāder

acoditatvāt karanasya vākyasya cāsya putrakāśrayabhuvanadīkṣāviṣayatvāt | kiraṇāyāṁ hi

samayidīkṣānte tato dīkṣāṁ samācaret ity upakramya putrakaviṣayabhuvanadīkṣā etadvākya-

pramukhaṁ nurvāhitety alam | īśvarapadalābho ‘parā muktiḥ |
‘The regular intiate (samayin) who has been purified (saṁsṣk, rta) in ths way°. (78a)

‘In this way° (means) by causing (him) to enter (sveral times) into the conditton of (the
devotee who is) a ḻimb of Rudra, which is that of a twice bom (Brahmin), by extracting (the
disciple’s previous caste status). The regular mitaate’ (samayin) is one who has the Rule and
observes confinement within the boundary (of the rules imposed) by the Supreme Lord’s
scriptures. As he says:

‘(He) 1s fit to utter the word (of the scriptures), so t0o to hear (it), study (it), offer
oblations and also worship etc. (SVT 4/78)
‘Uttering (the word of the scriptures) is repetition in order to make (the meaning) ascend
into the mtellect etc. ‘Heartng’ is the understanding of the meaning (of the scripture). Study is,
like the Veda, constant reading of the book of scriptures (āgamagrantha). The word ‘etc.’ (rfers
to) the repetition of Mantra and meditation etc. In this way, this regular initiate (is as follows):

‘He whose soul is completely pure by virtue of right conduct (caryā) and meditation

attains the Lord's plane.’ (SVT 4/79ab)

His soul is pure ‘by virtue of rght conduct (caryā) and meditation’, that is, by observing

the Rule and (by the practice of) Yoga Without initiation, that is, without his being applied to the

puriication of the Path, he is not fit to (practice) the Lord’s Yoga, and it is by that Yoga that his
fetters are purified, and when that happens, he attains the Lord’s plane (pada). Thus, if anyone is

conjoined to Īśvara’s reality level (tattva), 1 is not proper that the lower levels (adharapada) to be
purified in the course of the Putraka’s initiation. The Lord’s plane:
‘Place Kālarudra of the one who is established n purity (śuddhabhāva).’
In accord with (this) statement from the Kiraṇāgama, (one can say that) he has spoken

about the abode of Kālāgnīi. That is wrong (asat), because the regular initiate is not enjoined to
(take the 1nitation based on) conjunction (of the soul with worlds and reality levels), because the
subject of the statement of the Kiranatantra is the initiation of the worlds (bhuvanadīkṣā), which

is the basis of that of the Apprentice (putraka) It is (said) in the Kiraṇā that at the end of the
initiaton of the regular initiate, beginning with ‘he should then perform the initation’, this

statement is mainly concerned with the initiation of the worlds, which is for the Apprentice. (So

let ths) suffice. The attanment of the plane of the Lord is a lower form of liberation.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


śrīdevyāyāmale tūktam aṣṭārāntas triśūlake || 462 |
cakre bhairavasan nābhāv aghorādyaṣṭakārake |
bāhyāpare parā nemau madhyaśūle parāpare | 463 ||
jvālākule ‘ruṇe bhrāmyanmātṛpraṇavabhīṣaṇe |
cintite tu bahirhaste saṁárṣṭe samayī bhavet || 464 ||
pāśastobhādyas tu sadya uccikramiṣur asya tam |
prāṇair viyojakaṁ mūrdhṇi kṣipet saṁpūjya tad bahiḥ || 465 |I
anena śivahastena samayī bhavati sphuṭam |
It is said in the venerable Devyāyāmalatantra that ‘(the disciple)
becomes a regular initiate (samayin) when he has seen (the wheel the

teacher) imagines (is on the palm of his own) outer hand. It has eight

spokes, and within it is the Wheel of (Śiva’s) Trident. The essence (of the
three) Bhairavas (bhairavasat) is in (its) nave, and (the retinue of eight
Bhairavas) beginning with Aghora, on the eight spokes. (The goddess)
Aparā is on the outer (circumference). Parā is on the felly, while Parāparā

is on the middle prong (of the Trident). Red and full of flames, it is fierce
(and powerful) with the rotating syllable of Mātṛpraṇava (PHREMṀ) (that

makes it turn). Having (first) contemplated externally that (hand) and
having had a vision (of this wheel), he becomes a regular initiate

(samayin).

(In order to impart the initiation that bestows immediate release,

the teacher,) having (first) worshipped externally that (hand) which severs

the vital breaths (from the body), should place it on the head (of the

disciple) who wishes to ascend upwards immediately, (his) fetters paralysed
and more. By this, (the rite of) Śiva’s Hand, the disciple clearly becomes a
regular initiate.’ (462cd-466ab) (460-463)

‘(The wheel the teacher) imagines’ on the outer and inner part of the

hand, which is such, is the trident, on the central prong of which is located (the

goddess) Parāparā. It is within a wheel with eight spokes, which is red like
vermillion (sindiūra), and so is ‘full of flames’. Within it are reflected the

goddesses Parā and Aparā in two places, namely, the felly and outside the
spokes (on the circumference, respectively). Its nave is adorned with the three

Bhairavas, and is fierce (and frightening) with the syllable PHREMṀ, that

rotates all around each spoke of (this wheel), the spokes of which are presided
over by the group of eight (Bhairavas) beginning with Aghora. As it is
fundamentally (Śiva,) the supreme good, a right vision (of this wheel) paralyses
(the disciple’s) fetters, and so just by this alone, (regular) initiation into (the

observance of) the rule (samayadīkṣā) is accomplished. This is the meaning.

7 Contact (saṁṣparśa) with 1t, as we shall see, brings death.

” The following is an outlne of how thss procedure can serve to impart an initiation that
dispenses immediate liberation (sadyonirvānadīkṣā) by removing the vital breath from the

disciple’'s body, thus conjoining him with Śiva by hus death. Concerning this type of initiation, see
below, Chapter Nineteen.
” Printed edition reads pheṅkāra-; Th: phreṁkāra-.

TANTRĀLOKA

Not only is the (regular) initiation into (the observance of) the rule

(imparted) in this (way), but also the initiation that immediately dispenses

Nirvāṇa (sadyonirvāṇadīkṣā). Again, (the disciple) who desires to exit (the body

to aṭtain liberation), ‘having (first) worshiped externallyʼ the sacred fields etc.

in a manner consonant with the vital breath, ‘thisʼ, Śiva’s hand, ‘which severs

the vital breaths (from the body), should be placed on the head (of the
disciple)ʼ. Just by its touch alone, his initiation that immediately dispenses
Nirvāṇa (sadyonirvāṇadīkṣā) takes place. This is the meaning. As is said there

(in the Devyāyāmala), beginning with:

‘having drawn an eight-spoked wheel with a felly and a nave along with

intermediate spokes, marked above with a trident.’ (Then continuing with,) ‘one

should deposit Bhairava, who is located in the nave.’ ... ‘One should worship the

group of eight (Bhairavas) beginning with Aghora’... ‘They are located on™ the
group of eight spokes.” . . . ‘Parāparā, who is red like vermillion (sindūra), is on

the Trident.

The goddess Aparā and

Parā are located

on the outer

(circumference) and felly (respectively).” . . . ‘The wheel,™ in the centre of

which is Bhairava, rotates, and its light is red.’ . . . ‘Having visualized the great
wheel surrounded by a garland of flames on the hand, he should place the left

foot (PH) there on the staff of the trident (R), and all around on the spokes

conjoined everywhere with the right knee (E). . . . ‘By seeing (it the fetters are)
paralysed; by touching (it) he certainly dies.”
Surely (one may ask), what happens to him (now) that he has (acquired)
the status ofa regular initiate in this way?

T Ta -āsSTtr̄ī SīeHITaTSTTT II `8.9 11

3JũftṀṁ: āīīh: dTRITI<~N W #a: 1| Ḷē.¢ ||
tasyaiva bhāvividhivat tattvapāśaviyojane || 466 ||
putrakatvaṁ sa ca pare tattve yojyas tu daiśikaiḥ |
sa eva mantrajātijño japahomāditattvavit || 467 ||
nirvāṇakalaśenādau tata īśvarasaṁjñinā |
abhiṣiktaḥ sādhakaḥ syād bhogānte ‘sya pare layaḥ ll 468 II
(Then,) when he has been separated from the fetters of the

principles, in accord with the procedure that will be (explained further
ahead), he becomes a spiritual son (putraka), and should be conjoined by
the teacher to the supreme reality. He alone knows the types of invocations
Read ~te tu for for —tās tu.
7 Read with MS Th, cakraṅ for cakra-.
” The initiatton of the the spiritual son (putraka) is taught 1n detail in chapter sixteen.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


(jāti), the true nature of the repetition (of Mantra) (japa), (the offering of)

oblation and the rest. The adept (sādhaka) who has been consecrated

7 The ‘types’ —,jāti - are the words namah, svāhā, vauṣa, hīṁ, vaṣat and phai, which commonly
conclude Mantras already found in the Vedas (Brunner-Lachaux, 1963-1998, vol. 1, p. 13), and
also of Vaṣṇava and Buddhīst texts. Concerning these six ‘types’, see below 30/43cd-45ab, and
for details, see Dyczkowski 2009: vol. 5, note 15.
7: After drawng from the Devyāyāmala for the initiation of the regular adept,the initiation of
immediate release, the initiaton of the spiritual son (putraka) and the consecration (abhiṣeka) of
an adept (sādhaka), Abhnava again reverts to the Dīkṣottara. Thus, 15/466cd-467 (464-465ab) is
based on Dīkṣottara 7/115-116, and 15/468 (465cd-466ab) on Dīkṣottara 7/133-134. Note that,
according to the Dīkṣottara, the neophant becomes a spiritual son by this procedure. Although

Abhinava preṣents a procedure for this initiaton in detal in the following chapter, he does so
without reference to the Dīkṣottara. The passage, including 1ús introductory lines, reads:
adhvānaṁ kurute so hi na u na vyāpayet param | 12 I
samayī sarvatantreṣu bhavate nātra saṁśayaḥ |

putrako yena devesi kathyate ivayogibhiḥ l 1 13 I

tad aham saṅpravakṣyāmi kathyamānaṁ nibodha me |

gaṇayāgādtah kr̥vā drṣṭvā kher (> khe) maṇḍalāni u | 114 1
hutvā u vidhivad devi tatvapāśair viyojitaḥ |
yajitas tu pare tatve putrakas sa vidhīyate | 115 I
sa eva mantrakalpajño mantratantravidhānavit |

mantrakalpasuvetā ca deśakālavidhānavitḷ| 1 16 |
japayogavadhānajaḥ tatvajaś ca vidhānavit|
Dīkṣoitara IFP T 17B p. 908-909
‘The one who generates the Path (of the Worlds) certainly pervades the supreme He 1s a
regular initiate in all the Tantras, there can be no doubt here (about this). O mistress of the gods, I
will tell (you now) that (procedure) by whuch (the 1nitiate) is said to be a spiritual son (putraka),
according to Śiva yogis. Pay attention to me as I explain. After having performed the sacriḹice to
the host (of beings). having seen the assembhes (maṇḍala) in the Sky and offered oblation as
prescribed, 0 goddess, separated from the fetters of the principles and conjoined to the
supreme reality, he becomes a spiritual son. He alone knows the (special) procedures (kalpa)
(implemented) by Mantras and the procedures (vidhāna) of the Mantratantra (in general) He
knows well the (specal) procedures (kalpa) (implemented) by Mantras, the (appropriate)
procedures for (partcular) places and times, he knows the procedures concering the repetition of
Mantra (japa) and the Yogas and, knowing the true nature (of these things) (iatva), he knows the
procedures.’ Dīksottara 7/112cd-116
Abhinava says that the spirṭual son (putraka, that 1 sometimes translate as Apprentce)
(‘knows the types of Mantra (jāti)’ mantrajājño, whereas the manuscript of the Dīkṣotara says
‘he knows the (optional) procedures (kalpa) (implemented) by Mantras' mantrakalpajīo The
change is most lkely because Abh1mava was not interested in ‘kalpas’, that is, the kind of rituals

largely performed to fulfil particular desires. Again, the text continues eulogising the initiate’s
skil in the use of Mantra by declaring that he is also expert in magical and exorcstic rites, neither

of which interest Abhinava, and s0 he smmply omits to mention them.

The Dīkṣottara continues:


tāpaṉe dīpane caiva chedane ca tathaiva caI II7 |
mohanastaṁbhane caiva saṁputajñas tathaiva ca |
paramaṉtravibhedajīīo mantrāpyāyanatatparah | 1 18 I
deśajātivibhedajñaḥ yojanāya ca tatparaḥ
pātane daityabhūtebhyaḥ siṅṁhavidyādhareṣv api l I19 I
sarvajñas ca kr̥tayaś ca śaucācārasamanvitaḥ ḷ
samarthaś ca pantyāgī japāsaktas sadā maiaḥ l 120 l

TANTRĀLOKA

(abhiṣikta) is initially (conjoined with Śiva) by means of the jar of Nirvāṇa,
and then subsequently, by the one called Īśyara (to Sadāśiva). At the end
of (his Karmic) experience (bhoga), he dissolves into the supreme

(reality). (466cd-468) (464-466ab)

(The procedure) ‘that will be (explained further ahead)’ in Chapter

Sixteen etc. ‘He’ means the spiritual son (putraka). ‘He himself’ means the

regular initiate ‘when he has been separated from the fetters of the
principles’. ‘As (he will be) by means of the procedure that will be

(explained further ahead)’ — these (two statements) should be related to one
another here, and in the same way further ahead also. ‘Types (of Mantra) are
(the kinds of ejaculations that come at the conclusion of Mantras,) such as

namaḥ and svāhā. (The jar of) ‘Nirvāṇa’ (is identified with Śiva because) he
who bestows Nirvāṇa is here said to be Śiva. Although the adept (sādhaka) has
been conjoined to Śiva, his abiding dwelling (avasthāna) is on the plane of

Sadāśiva, so that (he may have) (karmic) experience (bhoga). Thuṣ, he says:

‘When (his Karmic) experience (bhoga) has come to an end, he dissolves

into the supreme (reality)’.

SEIE ĒTIĒFIṀ|SIGNEIRTĀṈṬAÉHI

--T-D—...,.......aQ ..AA,,..,,..
‘(This initiat knows the procedures) when heating, inflaming, and severing (are
requrred), and s0 t00 (the magical rites that) delude and paralyse (an enemy). He knows the
encapsulatton (of mantras with other mantras) and, intent on nourishing (his own) mantras, he

knows how to render asunder the mantras of others. He knows the varieties of locations and
classes (of mantras) and is 1ntent on conjointng (them) in order to cause the fall (of others) from

demons and ghosts, even 1n those who have as their base the Lion Vidyā. He knows everything
(that needs to be done) and what has been done, and possesses the (right) conduct of purification.

He is competent and a renunciate, who is considered t0 be always dedicated to the repetiton of

mantra.' Dīkṣottara 7/117-120
7 See ŚSP vol 3, pp. 500-553. The sādhaka 1s first initiated as a disciple who aspires to
liberaton (mummukṣu). He is thus united with Śiva. He 1s then placed on the plane of Sadāśiva,
where he can have the worldly benefits, he desires and 1s entitled to have due to his past Karma,

until they are exhausted.

Abhinava is drawing from Dīkṣottara 7/133-134, which is as follows

abhiṣiñcec ca matmān pṛthivyādisamāyutam |

nirvāṇakalaśaṁ yāvat eṣa eva vidhi (>vidhiḥ) smṛtaḥ || 133 ||

abhiṣiktaṁ tadā śiṣyaṁ ānayec chvasannidhau |
arghyādbhīs samabhyarcya adhikāraṁ samarpayet || 134 |

‘The wise man should (contnue) to sprmkle (abhisiñcet) the jar of Nirvāna, which is

conyotned to (the realiy levels) begmnnng with Eart, for as long as this procedure is considered

(to require it). Then, (when) the disciple has been consecrated, he should be led into Śiva’s
presence, and having worshipped him with the sacrificial liquid (arghya) etc., (the teacher) should
bestow upon him the authority (of an initiate).” Dīkṣottara 7/133-134.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


etair guṇaiḥ samāyukto dīkṣitaḥ śivaśāsane |
catuṣpātsaṁhitābhijñas tantrāṣṭādaśatatparaḥ || 469 ||

daśatantrātimārgajña ācāryaḥ sa vidhīyate |

prthivīm āditaḥ kṛtvā nirvāṇānte ‘sya yojanām ||/ 470 |
abhiṣekavidhau kuryād ācāryasya gurūttamaḥ |
He who possesses (all) these qualities and has been initiated into

Siva’s teachings, knows well the four sections (pāda) of the scripture,° is
intent (on studying) the eighteen (Siddhānta) Tantras (of the Rudra
division), and knows the ten (Siddhānta) Tantras (of the Śiva division, as

well as those of the Pāśupata) Atimārga,” is considered to be a teacher. A

most excellent teacher conjoins (the new) teacher in the course of the rite
(of his) consecration (abhiṣeka) (to all the levels of reality,) beginning with

Earth up to the extremity of Nirvāṇa.” (469-471ab) (466cd-468)

The Siddhāntāgamas and the Vaiṣṇava Saṁhitās that were modelled on them, are generally

said to be constituted of four pādas or sections, called Vdyā — doctrine, Kriyā -- ritual, Caryā —

right observance, and Yoga. However, examination of early Siddhāntigamas reveals that this
division is relatively late and artificial (see above note 15.45 on TĀv ad 15/14-17). Accordingly,
Sanderson suggests that in this case the term ‘pāda’ denotes these four topics a Tantra is supposed

to teach, rather than sections of it. This is possible because Jayaratha quotes two other passages

from the Devyāyāmala in which pādas are mentooned below in his commentary on 28/386cd387ab and 28/400-404 (referenced by Goodall 1998. 183 n 69). Even s, by Abhinava’s time, the
Āgamas were already thought to have been divided into these four sections, even 1f they were not
1n fact so. Thus, Abhinava would naturally follow standard duvistons like this, even though not
realsstc. The Siddhānta Āgamas were thought to number 28, but this was an ideal figure 1n
Abhinavagupta’s time. Had he noticed this and still stuck to the standard number, nonetheless?
This seems hardly likely. We must assume therefore that he is quoung here from an unknown
source, which was most probably a Siddhānta, for there is no menton of the Bhairava Tantras.
Clearly, Abhinava has combined, as he is wont to do, a reference from a Trika scripture (i.., the
Deyyāyāmala) with a Siddhānta source, to demonstrate that the procedures across the board from
‘left’ to ‘right’ are compatible.
? Śee above, 1/18 for the two groups of Siddhāntāgamas, namely, eighteen belonging to the
Rudra division (rudrabheda) and ten to the Śiva one (śivabheda). Atmārga — the Excellent Path,
is a common designation for Pāśupata Śaivism, whuch historically preceded that of the Āgamas.
Their scriptures were the Eight Pramāṇas, none of which has survived. See above, not 8,869.
The ‘supreme way° consists of the sixty-four so-called nondualiṣṭ Tantras
15/469-471ab (466cd-468) is based on Dīkṣottara 7/121-126ab, that reads, accordng to IFP T
17B:
catuṣpātsaṁjñitābhijñaḥ kalābhijãas tathaiva ca |
utsāhavān sadā dakṣaḥ sādhakas sa vidhīyate | 121 1I
p. 910) kalašāsṭadaśenaiva nava pañcadaśena vā |
abhiṣekapradātavyaṁ deśikena mahātmanā || 122 |
saṁpuṭīrtya vidyakhyam kalaśaṁ surasundari |
abhiṣiñcet tataḥ śiṣyaṁ vidhidṛṣṭena karmaṇā || 123 |ḷ

prṛthiyyādi samārabhya māyātatvam apaścimam |

saṁpuṭīkrtya paścāt tu vidyākhyenābhiṣecayet l| 124 |
evañcaivābhiṣiktas tu sādhakas sa vidhīyate |
pṛthivīmāditaḥ kr̥tvā nirvāṇāntena śobhane || 125 II
abhiṣiktas tu deveśe ācāryas sa vidhīyate |
‘One who knows well the four sections (pāda) of the scripture and the forces (kalā),
who is always laborious and skilful, is to be made an adept (sādhaka). The great souled teacher
should consecrate him with eighteen, nine or fifteen jars (of sacred water). Having encapsulated

TANTRĀḺOKA

‘These’ (qualities) are, for example, knowledge of the Mantras and
Tantras. ʻThe extremity of Nirvāṇa’ is the plane of Paramaśiva. Again, so that
(he can have) authority (to perform the rites), his abiding dwelling (avasthāna)
is in the lower (apara) Śiva, (whereas his) is in Siva. As is said (in the
scriptures):
‘The teacher™ abides on the (intermediate) plane, which is both
supreme and inferior (parāpara), in order that (he can have the) authority (to

perform the rites). In Siva’s state, he may impart initiation to adepts (sadhaka)

into (the state of) Sadāśiva, in the case of the spiritual son into the supreme

plane, and the regular initiate into (that of) Īśvara.”

The Four Types of Initiates, from Regular to Teacher
Surely (one may ask), in saying this, what is being said with regards to
the regular initiate? With this doubt in mind, he says:

T{TĪTHĀṜ̄ ĪTF garāī ṬSTÇTT II `#.9, 11
etair vākyair idaṁ coktaṁ samayī rājaputravat || 471 ||
sarvatraivādhikārī syāt puṭrakādipadatraye |

What is being said by these statements is that the ‘regular’
initiate is like a prince; he has the authority in all respects (to progress to
all) three grades, comprising that of spiritual son and the rest. (471cd-

472ab)

Just as a prince has been given the authority to, for example, (govern a)
kingdom, similarly this regular initiate also (is competent to progress to the
level of a) spiritual son and the others. All the initiations are said to be preceded
by the initiation of a regular initiate.

the jar called Vidyā (with mantra), O beautiful lady of the gods, he should then sprinkle the
disciple with the rite of which he has seen the procedure. (121-123)
Having encapsulated (the principles) beginning with Earth up to the principle of Māyā
in the end, he should then sprinkle (him) with (the water of the jar) called ‘Vidyā’.
He who has been sprinkled in this way is considered to be an adept. Taking Earth as the
first, with Nirvāna at the extremity, O beautiful one, (thus) sprinkled, O mistress of the gods, he is
considered to be a teacher.” Dīksottara 7/125-126ab

This reference is not found mn the Dīkṣoitara or the MV. Perhaps it is taken from the

Devyāyāmala, from which Abhinava also draws in this section.

7 Sanderson (reported by Goodall 1998. 184 n 69) suggests on the basis of this remark that
verses 402 to 471ab (400-468) are all drawn (or paraphrased) from the Devyāyāmala. Indeed,
references are sparse 1n thus section; however, a good number have been 1dentified as derived

from chapter eight of the Mālinīvijayottara in the same sequential order as the rest of this chapter.

The prevtous passage is derived from one in the Dīkṣotara. So even, if Sanderson’s contention is

true, 1t needs be qualified, for ‘by these statements' Abhinava 1s in fact implying that they are

drawn from various sources, although even so, they agree in the manner he describes


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


Although there is no distinction between the spiritual son and the
teacher with regards to (their being both equally) conjoined to the supreme

principle, (even s0,) he explains that there is some difference (between them).

II oz II
JTrēīā a 7 qā: aāTad ftr--āīm 1

putrako daiśikatve tu tulyayojaniko bhavet || 472 ||
adhikārī sa na punaḥ sādhane bhinnayojane |
The spiritual son is equally conjoined (to the supreme principle,) as

is the teacher. However, he is not competent to (apply) the means (to

perform and participate in the rites which entail bringing about) various
kinds of conjunctions (at various reality levels for a disciple). (472c473ab)
‘He’ is the spiritual son. ‘The means’ is initiation, the rites of

installation (of the deity) (prariṣṭhā) etc., for which purpose the teacher is said

to abide on the (intermediate) plane, which is both supreme and inferior
(parāpara). Thusṣ, he says (it entails) ‘various kinds of conjunctions’.
Surely (one may ask), it is possible for a regular initiate (to have
received) a prior initiation that serves to extract sectarian signs (of his previous
religious affiliations); so how is it that it has been said here that he is like a
prince (in the sense that he is authorized to progress to higher levels of
initiation)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TāT̄ī āTGTTCJHĪTRTTĪTRĪG; /|| RA“EṈĪI

etattantre samayyādikramād āptottarakriyaḥ || 473 I|
ācāryo na puṇar bauddhavaiṣṇavādiḥ kadācana |
A teacher who has attained (the authority and knowledge to
perform) more advanced rites has become so gradually, (passing through

the levels of initiation,) beginning with that of regular initiate in this

(particular Saiva) Tantra. He could (most certainly) never be a Buddhist or

a Vaiṣṇava. (473cd-474ab)

: See below 16/295ab ff. Abhinava is referring to forms of initiaton whereby a teacher conjoins
hus disciple to ascending reality levels and their corresponding worlds in the course of initiation

(yojankadīkṣā). In other words, Abhinava is saying that the apprentice has attained the level of
his teacher, but is not competent to initiate others or perform rites in which these conjunctions are

required

TANTRĀLOKA

Preparing the Bed (śayyākḷpti)

sāṁ g frē--̄ l| ’y.9 1|

ftrs frrṛra faṇāzidṁ earrāīīaā: 1 x u, 1

I GTTĀITJTR̥̄TTṬITS EIR I 49¥ 1

evaṁ prasaṅgān nirṇītaṁ prakṛtaṁ tu nirūpyate || 474 ||
Śivahastavidhiṁ kr̥tvā tena saṁpluṣṭapāśakam |
Śiṣyaṁ vidhāya viśrāntiparyantaṁ dhyānayogataḥ || 475 1|
tataḥ kumbhe ʻstrakalaśe vahnau svātmani taṁ śiśum |
praṇāmaṁ kārayet paścād bhūtamātṛbalīṁ kṣipet |I 476 ||

Ṁ(This) has thus been explained by the way. (Now we go back to)

discussing the main point. After having performed the prescribed rite of
Siva’s Hand, and thereby burnt away the (disciple’s) fetters, (the teacher)
should make that disciple bow (with reverence) to the large jar, the jar onto
which the Weapon (PHAT) has been deposited, the fire, and his own Self,
until, by means of meditation, he ultimately (attains) rest (within Śiva).

After that, one should throw an offering (outside the sacrificial surface) to
the ghosts and the Mothers.” (474cd-476) (472-474ab)
(The reference here to the initiate as a) ‘teacher’ is (only) indicative,
thus (he may be) an adept also. As he will say (further ahead):

‘The initiation (that bestows) liberation to those who previously bore
the signs (of other traditions) does not carry with it the competence (to become a
teacher etc.) Those (initiates who must be) born again are not fit to be on the

path (that leads to becoming) a teacher or an adept.

471¢d-474 1s Abhinava’s observation. The source of 475-476 has not been determined. As
Abhava is not drawing from the Dīkṣottara, it may be that from 474cd to 495ab (472 to 491ab),

he 1s drawiṅg again from the Devyāyāmala.
" Bali literally means an anmal sacrifice. Although also literally done, often a symbolic

subsutute is offered to replace the ammal. Offerng hali may be an independent rite in itself. More

often it is an ancillary rite performed along with the main one. It serves as an occasion to make

offermgs to attendant deities or supernatural beings of place such as sacred sutes, geographical
locattons and the like, including the location where the rite is taking place and the foundations of a

house. Its offered to beings such as ghosts (bhāta), guardians of place (kṣetrapāla), the Mothers
(mātrkā) and yoginīs, to pacify them and make them propitious. In the MV. it 1s prescribed for all

the ghosts 1n all the darections, where it is said that ‘the teacher should then perform the rite of
offering bali in all the quarters wath this mantra: ‘“OM KṢAḤ KṢAḤ SARVABHŪTEBHYO
SVĀHĀ’. MV 8/124.
Below, 22/28cd-29ab.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------

Thus, it was said previously that ‘(he who possesses (all) these qualities

and) has been initiated into Śiva’s teachings.'" ‘Thereby’, that is, by Siva’s
Hand.


Now in order to fashion the bed, he says:

Yoga of the Disciple with the Teacher When Sleeping

āīā: JTgTaā-d JāGĀTHaIfVHĪ-īTḤ |
aṝñ ftā a 1| x ōs ||
̄aaTa-̄ fr--Tīaā
fyrwrgcarṣfasāfs caī āgrīēaī-īī |

YTGĀĪTTGTSĪIṀ: TTTGTGJTHIATḤ |I #9¢ 11

grtaāīṁaāṝṭṝzrzī faaṁāaa ftraṁ 11 xix 1

=EI Jcaīādas gIJII<Ī Gaī īq

Tācfā̃drzaā ēcaāṁṁrcad frzfatēī#ēṁ: 11 x¢e. 11
tataḥ śaṅkaram abhyarcya śayyām astrābhimantritām |
kṛtvāsyāṁ śiṣyam āropya nyastamantraṁ vidhāya ca || 477 II
śiṣyahṛccakraviśrāntiṁ kṛtvā taddvādaśāntagaḥ |
bhavet kṣīṇakalājālaḥ svaradvādaśakodayāt || 473 I
tataḥ praveśapracitakalāṣoḍaśakojjvalaḥ |
saṁpūrṇasvātmaciccandro viśrāmyed dhṛdaye śiśoḥ I| 479 ||
svayaṁ vyutthānaparyantaṁ dvādaśāntaṁ tato vrajet |
punar viśec ca hṛccakram itthaṁ nidrāvidhikramaḥ l| 480 I

7"Then, after having worshipped SŚiva and prepared the bed

consecrated with the Weapon (PHAT), (the teacher) places his disciple on it
and deposits the (appropriate) Mantras (onto him). Then, having (brought
b Above, 15/469b (466d).

7 In order to induce the soul to rise through the stages and levels, to which it must ascend in

order to reach Śiva and thereby be initiated, the teacher extracts it from the disciple’s heart when
he is asleep. This is because it is the common belief, exemplified in the following passages from
the Upaniṣads, that sleep is a state in which the individual soul rests passively within the heart.

Thus, we read in the Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣad:

‘Then Ajātaśatru said: “When this man was asleep, where was his conscious spirit,

whence did it return?” And Gārgya did not know. 16

Then Ajātaśatru said: “When this man was asleep, his conscious spirit, having assumed
into himself by his consciousness the consciousness of all the vital breaths (prāṇāḥ), was dwelling
in the inner space within the heart. When he holds these (vital breaths), then a person is said to be

asleep. When his breath is withheld, his speech is withheld, his eye is withheld, his ear is

withheld, his mind is withheld. 17
Now when he is in deep sleep, when he does not know anything, then the seventy-two
thousand arteries called hitāḥ move from the heart to the pericardium. Entering into them, he rests
in the pericardium. Just as a young man or a king or a great Brahmin might rest, when
experiencing extreme joy, so does he rest.” 19 BṛUp 2/1/16-17, 19

TANTRĀLOKA

his inhaled breath) to rest in the wheel of (his) disciple’s heart, (by the flow

of the disciple’s exhaled breath) he goes to (his) End of the Twelve. (This
process takes place as follows. Initially,) as the (solar energies of) the twelve

vowels arise (progressively in the course of the teacher’s solar
exhalation),® the (lunar) energies (kalā) (of the teacher’s breath) gradually
diminish.

Then, burning radiantly with the sixteen (energies of the Moon of

inhalation), accumulated (as the breath) enters,® the Moon of (the

teacher’s) own consciousness, completely full, he brings it to rest in the
disciple’s heart. He then travels to (the disciple’s) End of the Twelve, to
then return into the wheel of his heart and so on, (back and forth in
consonance with his breathing,) until (the disciple) wakes up by himself.
Such is the process that (constitutes) the procedure while (the disciple)

sleeps (nidrāvidhikrama). (477-480) (474cd-478ab)

‘The twelve vowelsʼ are the energies (kalā) of the sun. ‘Such’ (is the

procedure, namely) the entry and exit of the breath in this way of the disciple
and oneself, in the stated manner.

Ṝ-T SJTTGI] TJTTTĪRTTHāHT |1| 5.¢3 |1
āyātanidraḥ Śśiṣyo ʻsau nirmalau śaśibhāskarau |

hṛccakre pratisaṁdhatte balāt pūrṇakṛśātmakau || 481 |

When the disciple has (just) fallen asleep, he gathers together (and

contemplates) forcefully in the wheel of (his) heart the pure Moon and Sun
(of inhalation and exhalation) that are full and depleted. (481) (478cd-

479ab)

Surely (one may ask), even if this is so, what of that? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

” The twelve vowels make up the stream of the Śun of prāṇa, the exhaled breath. The disciple’s

entry into his heart coincides with the teacher’s 1nhalation, and hus rest in the End of the Twelve

with his exhalation. Thus, the teacher enters the disciple’s heart by exhalng while the disc1ple
imhales, and the End of the Twelve by inhaling when his disciple exhales. Thus flow of the vital

breath, back and forth between teacher and disciple, continues until the disciple wakes up.
” See above, 5/63cd-65.

70 Jṭis possible that here Abhinava is presenting here the essential practce of a number of simar

procedures, rather than drawing from any one source. We are alerted to this posstbility because

the authority that he supplies for it is a nondescript meditaton on the breath taught in the

Vijñānabhairava. In this way, he has no need to refer to any one partcular variant of this

procedure. However, we have no proof that he is doing ths here. It is more likely that he is basng

himself on just one source. Up to now he has followed the Devyāyāmala, along with the

Dikṣottara. As it is not found in the latter, he may well be contnung to follow the procedure
taught in the Devyāyāmala. The same may be the case with the following section concerning the
examimatton of dreams (vicārana).


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


The Disciple’s Yogic Dreaming

aJTṀ ṂIRYĪT-THTRḺCĪHITTITTC II #¢2 11
haṭhanirmalacandrārkaprakāśaḥ satyam īkṣate |

svapnaṁ bhāviśubhānyatvasphuṭībhāvanakovidam || 482 |

(Possessing as his) light that of the Moon and Sun, pure (by the

practice of this) forceful (haṭha yoga,) he sees a dream that is true and is

capable of clearly reflecting on future (events), both auspicious and

otherwise. (482) (479cd-480ab)
he says:

What is the authority here (for this teaching)? With this doubt in mind,

sīaī gJḺTTN |

uktaṁṅ ca pūrṇāṁ ca kr̥śāṁ dhyātvā dvādaśagocare |
praviśya hṛdaye dhyāyet suptaḥ svācchandyam āpnuyāt || 483 ||

It is said that, ‘having meditated on (the energy of the vital breath,

first) full and (then) thin, in the region of the twelve (finger space), once
having entered into the heart (in the centre), meditating, the one who sleeps

aṭṭains freedom.’””' (483) (480cd-481ab)
7! This verse is a light paraphrase of VBh 55.

pīnāṁ ca durbalāṁ śaktiṁ dhyātvā dvādaśagocare |

praviśya hrdaye dhyāyan muktaḥ svapnasvātantryam āpnuyāt || 55 |I
‘Having meditated on the energy (of the breath,) fat (with its natural sound) as well as

weak (and lengthy) in the regton of the twelve (finger space, then) once having entered the heart

(when fallng asleep) engaged (in this) meditation, one attains mastery over one’s dreams.

The printed edition reads muktaḥ instead of suptah. This verse is also quoted in the
SpNir (p. 56); there the reading 1s svapna-. Adopúng that reading, the verse as it appears in the
printed editon can be translated as follows: “‘Meditating on the energy (of the breath) gross and
weak in the region of the twelve-finger space and having entered the heart meditating, one attains

the freedom to dream (svapnasvātantrya). Kṣemarāja quotes this verse 1n hus commentary on

SpKā 33-34, whch reads:

‘Requested by the will, the benefactor makes the Sun and Moon rise, and bestows on the

embodied while they wake, the objects that are created in (their) heart. So also, in the dream state

(Śiva), residing in the centre, manifests without exception, always and most vividly, the things
(his devotee) desires, because he never desists from (his) prayerful request.”

It is likely that the author of the Stanzas knew the Vijñānabhairava. It appears that

Rāmabhatṭa, commenting on the Stanzas, knew this verse with this vanant, seeing, as does
Kṣemarāja, its relevance to these verses in the Stanzas. Thus, in his commentary he writes: “(The

true yogi 1s one who), because he 1s intent every moment (on exercisng his) reflective awareness

TANTRĀLOKA

‘It is said’ in the venerable Vijñānabhairavatantra. The reading there

(with reference to the energy of the vital breath) is ‘fat and weakʼ (pīnāṁ ca
durbalāṁ) instead of ‘full and thin’ (pūrṇāṁ ca kṛśāṁ).
The Examination of Dreams (vicāraṇa)

fōraī īat-aša ḷgaq |

EṞAREIE! TaHT āīsēīTē̄TTaTT | <¢3 1|
aTTTS TTVHĪGFTTĪTTTTT: |

TĪ: GŪāTTTTCAĪSTTTTTGT |I 5¢4 11

eEṟE-ĀEIEEIṀIEEIEI-CTIUSHṈIYAI

āī? JT. ṀadT-ṀTTT TIG ṬĪTKAĪ |

āyātanidre ca śiśau gururabhyarcya śaṅkaram |
caruṁ bhuñjĩta sasakhã tato ʻdyãd dantadhãvanam || 484 ||
svapyācca mantraraśmīddhahṛccakrārpitamānasaḥ |
prātarguruḥ kṛtāśeṣanityo ‘bhyarcitaśaṅkaraḥ || 485 ||
śiṣyātmanoḥ ṣvapnadṛṣṭāvarthau vitte balābalāt |
svadrṣṭaṁ balavannānyat saṁbodhodrekayogataḥ || 486 ||
bodhasāmye punaḥ svapnasāmyaṁ syād guruśiṣyayoḥ |

When the disciple has (just) fallen asleep and the teacher has

worshipped Siva, he should eat the sacrificial pap together with his
assistants (sasakhā). Then he should brush his teeth and go to sleep,

(pratyavamarśa), never at any time, in the course of any experence, neglects the prayer he has
achieved through hus own mnate power. (This prayer is his) merger with hus own nature, the
Benefactor and Lord of all. The Benefactor manifests for one such as he (who is not negligent in

his prayer) the things he desires, even while he dreams, just as when he is avake. The things (he
experiences) while dreaming that (seem to come about) freely, (independent of his will) do not
restrict (his) own (inherent) power, which is that of universal agency. This is because he is (no

longer) a worldly soul subject to rebirth, but he is free and creates them by (his) own power as he
wishes. Just as Bhartṛhari says: ‘The lord of all, endowed with every power, dividing Himself by
Himself and creating phenomena of various sorts, becomes, while dreaming, the enjoyer.’

Therefore, ths 1s called ‘freedom to dream’ (svapnasvātantrya), and as there is no difference for

the (enlightened yogi) between waking and dreamsng, this same (state) is said to be ‘the
destruction of the cover of darkness that obscures (consciousness).’ (Dyczkowski 1992a: 113)

Lucid dreaming and its application to yogic practice in the context of the Spanda teachings is
diṣcussed in detail in Dyczkowski 1992a 241-245.
It is a standard part of the preliminary ntes of initiation for the teacher to examine the

postulant's dreams to determine whether they are auspicious or otherwise. Abhinava adds a new
dimension to thrs procedure by teaching how the neophant can remain lucid in the dream state. In

this context, Abhmava 1s not concerned with the freedom the luctd dreamer may have to create or
alter the contents of his dreams, he focuses instead on the insight that he can develop as a lucid
dreamer, to see for himself directly whether the signs of future events (in this case the initiation)
are auspicious or not

7”. See previous note


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


concentrating on the wheel of the heart flaming with the rays of Mantras.

Early morning, after having performed all the regular daily rites and
worshipped Siva, the teacher examines what was seen (in his own and his
disciple’s) dreams, (in order to assess) their relative strength. What he
himself has seen is the stronger (dream), not that of the other, because it is
associated with (the greater) intensity of his own consciousness. If the (level

of awakened) consciousness of the teacher and that of the disciple are
equal, their dreams should be the same. (484-487ab) (481cd-484)

‘The sacrificial pap” was (prepared and) placed (there) for oneself.

(The teacher) ‘examines’ (his dreams and that of his disciple), that is, he

assesses (and compares their relative significance, and whether they are
auspicious or not). With this (statement) he begins (to discuss the manner and
form of) the assessment of the dream.

ĠaTTTTGTTTṬSTRTTTTTaHĪTRTḤ ÁI 5¢.9 11

qasĩ aaād Taāāīrr̥TḤeTēTT 1| #¢8 11

Tāīsē| T̄ī āīāSVITAISĀH; ||`#80 ||

sai
fē wgṝ ferq a- ūvad #ēT 11 #82 1

devāgnigurutatpūjākāraṇopaskarādikam || 487 |I

hṛdyā strī madyapānaṁ cāpy āmamāṁsasya bhakṣaṇam |
raktapānaṁ śiraśchedo raktaviṇmūtralepanam || 488 II

parvatāśvagajaprāyahr̥dyayugyādhirohaṇam |
yat prītyai syād api prāyas tat tac chubham udāhṛtam || 489 ||

taṁ khyāpayet tuṣṭivr̥ddhyai hlādo hi paramaṁ phalam |
ato ʻ‘nyad aśubhaṁ tatra homo ‘ṣṭaśatako ‘strataḥ || 490 ||
aśubhaṁ nāśubham iti śiṣyebhyo kathayed guruḥ |
rūḍhāṁ hi śaṅkāṁ vicchettuṁ yatnaḥ saṅghaṭate mahān || 491 |
yeṣāṁ tu śaṅkāvilayas teṣāṁ svapnavaśotthitam |
śubhāśubhaṁ na kiñcit syāt š+ k sk +

TANTRĀLOKA

”(The disciple may have the following dream. He may dream of) 1)
the preparation and performance etc. of the rites to worship the gods, fire,

and the teacher, 2) a beautiful woman, 3) the drinking of wine, 4) the eating
of raw meat, 5) the drinking of blood, 6) the severing of (one’s own) head,
7) smearing oneself with blood, dung or urine, 8) mounting onto pleasing
animals and riding them, such as horses or elephants, and 9) climbing a

mountain.

Each one of these is said to be an auspicious dream, and they are

generally pleasing. (The teacher) should explain that (to his disciple) so as
to develop his sense of satisfaction (and be pleased). Indeed, joy (hlāda) is
the supreme fruit.

Thus, (a dream) that is other than (such) is inauspicious. There (in

that case, in order to neutralise it, the teacher) should perform one hundred
and eight oblations (whilst reciting) the Weapon Mantra. (Moreover, if) the
dream is inauspicious, the teacher should not tell that to his disciple. When

a doubt is well-rooted, it requires a great deal of effort to remove it. But for
those whose doubts have ended, auspicious or inauspicious (dreams) are of
no consequence at all. (487-492abc) (485-490a)

‘Another (dream)ī witnessed by the disciple. (If the degree of
awakened, lucid consciousness of the teacher and that of the disciple is the
same,) ʻ‘ṭheir dreams should be the sameʼ, not more or less strong (in

determining whether they are auspicious or not). (An auspicious dream) ‘is
generally pleasing’. The sense is that (some auspicious dreams,) like the
severing (of one’s own head,) are not pleasing. (The teacher) should explain
‘that’ auspicious dream (to his disciple). ‘Another (dream) that is other than

that’ aforementioned dream. ‘Another’ means the opposite of that. (Thus,
instead of dreaming of raw meat, which is auspicious, one may dream of)
cooked meat (which is inauspicious). As is said:

‘That which is the opposite of that is said to be a bad dream, as is, for

example, (dreaming about) eating cooked meat, (being) massaged, falling into a

deep precipice and the like.’

The reason why (the teacher should not tell his disciple that his dream)

is inauspicious is (explained) in the second half (of this verse). But for those

whose doubts have ended, (auspicious or inauspicious dreams are of no
consequence at all,) because (consciousness) free of thought constructs is not
divided into into auspicious and inauspicious. This is the sense.
These (disciples) vary even when asleep, because their nature consists
of the three qualities (of Nature). Thus, he says:

T1 Concerning the prognosis of auspicious and inauspicious dreams, see Dyczkowski 2009 and
SSP.

T This reference seems to have been drawn from the source Abhinava is drawing his account of
the prognostication of dreams from, whch could be the Devyāyāmala.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


agšci fārāravīq 1| x82 1

f-ēfzrīatzīzī qarçTT=̄ATJIHT II #R83 II

çyuç cetthaṁ citratāvaśāt || 492 ||
sphutaṁ paśyati sattvātmā rājaso liṅgamātrataḥ |
na kiñcit tāmasas tasya sukhaduḥkhāc chubhāśubham || 493 1|

(The dream experiences of a disciple vary) in this way, according to

the variety (of the qualities (guna) to which he is subject). The sattvic

(disciple) sees (his) dream very clearly, the rājasic by means of signs and
(other) indications, and finally, the tāmasic one does not see anything at all.

The auspicious and inauspicious character of the latter’s (dreams) is

determined solely by the pleasure or suffering (he experiences when

asleep). (492cd-493) (490b-491ab)

Surely (one may ask), the tāmasic (disciple) would not see anything. So
how could one determine whether his (dream) is auspicious or inauspicious?

With this doubt in mind, he says that ‘the auspicious and inauspicious
character of the latter’s (dreams) is determined solely by the pleasure or

suffering (he experiences when asleep)’.

Surely (one may ask), how could the tāmasic (disciple) be qualified for
the rite of initiation? Presenting this doubt, he removes it:

7JII I x7 1|
nanvy atra tāmaso nāma kathaṁ yogyo vidhau bhavet |

maiva mā vigrahaṁ kaścit kvacit kasyāpi vai guṇaḥ || 494 II
Surely, (one may ask) here, how can the tāmasic (disciple) be fit for
the rite (of initiation)? (I reply that) there is no need to argue. Any
(particular) quality (may be possessed) by anybody anywhere (according to
what the case may be or the person). (494) (491cd-492ab)

(The word) ‘indeed’ serves to indicate emphasis, and that should be

related everywhere (to each alternative). The ‘quality’ (meant is), in other
words, the one that predominates.

He illustrates this (teaching):


gatṃītakrraīst7 ṣrī afe ar: 1

TANTRĀLOKA

sarvasāttvikaceṣṭo ‘pi bhojane yadi tāmasaḥ |

kiṁ tataḥ so ʻdhamaḥ kiṁ vãpy utkr̥ṣṭas tadviparyayaḥ || 495 I|
If, for example, a person is tāmasic only with respect to his food and
sattvic with respect to all (the rest of his) behaviour, is he therefore a low
(person who is not fit to receive initiation)? Or, if one is the opposite of that,
is he so excellent (that he is fit to receive it)? (495) (492cd-493ab)

‘Therefore’, because he is tāmasic only with respect to what he eats?
‘One who is the opposite of that’, that is, tāmasic in every circumstance, but

sāttvika only with respect to what he eats.

(He now) relates (what he is saying to the main) point.

vrōāca ]av a aṁṀ̄Ṁ-: | x< 1
āyātaśaktipāto ‘pi dīkṣito ‘pi guṇasthiteḥ |

vicitrātmā bhaved eva mukhye tv arthe samāhitaḥ || 496 ||

Even a person who has received a descent of the power (of grace)
and has been initiated, because (he is affected by the diverse) conditions of
the qualities, (he himself is) varied (in his behaviour and intentions), but
(even so, remains equally) attentive to (his) main purpose. (496) (493cd-

494ab)

‘(The diverse) condition of the qualities is due to the fact that the
material (prākṛta) body continues to be (in a certain) state for (only) some
(limited period of) time. “(His) main purpose’ is initiation.

Now in order to expound the rite of the Rule, he says:


The Purifying Rites to Make a Brahmin (sāmayaṁ karma)

HHÚRTCṈI

AIERÉÉESAICEIEĀEHKGIAH

KEEHIḤŪEIAPIEEḺĀEICĀĒēe IRTVĀI

tato guruḥ śiśor mantrapūrvakaṁ devatārcanam |
deśayet sa ca tat kuryāt saṁskuryāt taṁ tato guruḥ l| 497 I|
hṛdādicakraṣaṭkasthān brahmādīn ṣaṭ samāhitaḥ |
spṛśec chīśoḥ prāṇavṛttyā pratyekaṁ cāṣṭa saṁskriyāḥ l| 498 II
hṛdayādidviṣaṭkāntaṁ bodhasparśapavitritaḥ |


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


The teacher should then teach (his) disciple how to perform the rite
of worship of the deity along with (the required) Mantras and he should do
it. Then the teacher should purify him. (In order to do this,) well

concentrated (samāhita), he should make contact by means of the activity of

(his) vital breath with the six causal forces,” Brahmā and the rest, that are

located in the six wheels of (the subtle body of the) disciple, from the heart

onwards, and (perform) the eight rites of purification for each one, from

the heart to the End of the Twelve. (The disciple) has been purified (as we

shall see) by coming in contact with (pure) consciousness.” (497-499ab)

(494cd-496)

‘Then’ (the teacher should purify him) after he has taught (his disciple
how) to worship the deity etc. He explains (how that is to be done, with
reference to the) ‘the wheels of (the subtle body of the) disciple, from the
heart onwards’ʼ. These six wheels are the heart, throat, palate, (the place)

between the eyebrows, forehead and the Cavity of Brahmā. The eight (rites of
purification) ‘for each one’ multiplied by six make the forty-eight purifications
(saṁskāra). This is the meaning. ‘(The disciple) who has been purified by

coming in contact with (pure) consciousness’. In accord with the view that
‘by abandoning the six (causes), in the seventh (the yogi achieves) merger (into

the Supreme Principle),” he has been purified by coming in contact with the

consciousness that is the body of the supreme subject located in the End of the
Twelve, not by (complete and) direct merger. The meaning is that he is pierced
through by it. As he will say:
‘(The disciple who has) attained the state of a ‘twice-born’ should just
make contact with the End of the Twelve by virtue of his own oneness (within
himself, but) not rest within it. Descending from it immediately, he attains (the

condition of a devotee of) Rudra, who is a part (of him) (aṁśa), by virtue of
which the ‘regular” initiate (samayin) is purified (to be an initiate)

He (goes on) to say that his accomplishment of the other purifying (and
empowering) rites (sariskāra) (is achieved) by this much alone.
Forty-eight and Seven Purifying Rites Whereby

the Disciple becomes a Brahmin

TRĪTTTĪCCTTTĪTĒATRGS: || `68, 1
{eeút=zTEETFUĪKÉFEHEEITḤ
71 See above, note 8,25.

7 The epithet hodhasparśapavitritaḥ, which is here made to refer to the discple, may also refer
to the teacher.

71 SVT 4/246b. Also quoted above ad 6/192 (191cd-192ab) (see note there) and ad 15/434cd-438
(432-436ab).
71 Below, 15/523-524ab (19-520ab).

TANTRĀLOKA

āhārabījabhāvādidoṣadhvaṁsād bhaved dvijaḥ || 499 ||
vasuvedākhyasaṁskārapūrṇa itthaṁ dvijaḥ sthitaḥ |
Thus, he becomes thereby, due to the destruction of the defects in
(his) food, seed, and character etc., ‘twice born’ (dvija).”” (Purified by) all
forty-eight purificatory rites, he is in this way ‘twice born’ (in all respects).
(499cd-500ab)


The ‘etc.’ refers to (his) location. As is said (in the Svacchandatantra):


‘He is twice-born when (his) seed, food, location and character are pure.”™

There (in that context) defects in the food are due to the failure to carry out (the
rules and regulations) according to the modality (of right conduct) (prakriyā)
taught in the Vedas and the smṛtis. (It is necessary to purify the) defects in the
seed, (because) according to (the following) view (stated in the Mukutasaṁhitā),

true purity of the seed is impossible:

‘The status of a Brahmin is due to the purity of the seed (from which he

was conceived), and that (purity of seed) is present in women. (However,) their

fickle mind (cetas) runs after even (the lowest) outcastes.”!

Defects (in a person’s character arise) because of (his) association with

falsity, lack of sincerity, and the like. Defects in (oneʼs) location is due to
contact with (unclean) foreigners (mleccha) and the like (in that place). (One

who is twice born) is purified by the forty-eight purifying (and empowering

rites).


He (now) names them:

See Pandey, 1993: 20.

SVT 4/68ab, cf. MIT, Kriyāpāda 8/64.

" Kṣemarāja quotes this verse in SvTu ad 4/68ab, saying it is from the Mukuṭasaṁhitā, and
comments:
iti mukuṭasaṁhitoktanyāyāṉn na kvacid bījaśuddhir vāstavī saṁbhãvyate, iti sā mantrair eva
saṁpādyā | āhārasya śrutismṛtyuktaprakriyayā anirvāhād aśuddhir asúi, deśasyāpi mlecchādisaṁparkāt, bhāvasyāṣsatyānārjavadiyogād iti śuddhir ādheyaiva ||
‘According to the teaching stated in the venerable Mukuṭasaṁhitā, true purity of seed is
not possible anywhere (in any circumstance). Thus, (if it exists,) it is brought about by Mantras
alone. Food is impure, because the procedure taught in the Vedas and smṛtis has not been
observed. A countryʼs (impurity) is due to contact (there) with outcaste foreigners (mleccha) and
the like, and that of (one’s own) basic state (bhāva) is due to lack of truthfulness and rectitude etc.
Thus, purity (is not an innate quality, it) needs to be brought about.”
Abhinava tells us that Mukuṭasaṁhitā deals extensively with the nature of caste
distinctions, to conclude that they are just notions. He writes:
jātīnāṁ ca brāhmaṇādīnāṁ nāsti sthitiḥ - kalpitatvāt upadeśavyaṇgateti tu durbuddhīn paśūn
pratyāyayet — iti ca bhagavatā mukuṭasahitāyāṁ vistarato nirṇītam iha tu ayatnasiddham eva |
‘Castes such as Brahmin and the rest have no (objective) existence (sthiti), because they
are (merely) conceptual. It is a clarification of doctrine (of social law) that serves to inṣtil
understanding in fettered souls of poor intellect. The Lord has taught this extensively in the
Mukutasaṁhitā, whereas here (this) is proved (to be true) effortlessly.” PTv p. 237


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


|I 400 1|

JṬ f-TGĒHUĪ TTTIJE] TATTēēī |

ārsftz% ṁsttāḥ ālīaḥ šB̄. 1| uc?, 11

JGIE: TJYI: TS TITHGTGTĪ: || 40 ||

- ṁazṣ| qaīq, āīṁa q zfer'arī: | uoo3 11
3mṁzṁṝrri = tīvĩ-īa: aaḷ: |

TṬĪĪA ṬIGī: āTTTAT TE TAHĪ |I Ḷ0% |1

ñ-ārāīsfīqaīsa arza:: dr̥fkraīsīdī |

raTrrTGāaīāī TēRATTTTTĪ STT |I| 4 1|

aāḷ TTJaATI T Jf̄ā: TTTIGṀ || 40.9 1 |

garbhãdhãnaṁ puṁsavanaṁ sīmanto jātakarma ca || 500 l|

15/502 is based on SvT 10/386cd-387ab, 503a is drawn from SvT 10/388cd-394 (which deals
with the types of vratabandha), and 503bcd from 10/395-396 (the remaining five listed here).
503c — SVT 10/396cd; 502ab — SVT 10/395ab, 504a — SVT 10/397 504bcd-505ab drawn from SvT
10/398bcd-399 505cd-506ab is based on SvT 10/400cd-402ab. 506cd-507ab based on SYT
10/403-404°,507cd — SVT 10/404cd-406 508ab — SVT 10/407cd-408ab 509 — SVT 10/410-411ab.
follows:

15/502 1s based on SYT 10/386cd-387ab which 1s, along with the commentary, as

brāhmaṇasyãdhkárãṣṭau catvãrṁśatam eva ca |

viśodhayed ity eva || tān kramenāha ---garbhaḥ puṁsavanaṁ caiva sĩīmanto jãtakarma ca l| 386 |1
nāma niskramanaṁ caiva annaprāśanacūḍakam |
anenaiva varārohe śodhyās tv aṣṭau prakītītāḥ || 387 ||

sīmanto 'ṅgopāṅgavibhāgasampattiḥ, niṣkramaṇam ādiútyadarśanam, cūḍakam śikhākḷptiḥ 1
anenaiveti, proktakramāyātaviniyogenaiśānabhaṭṭārakakāraṇakena daśāhutprayogeṇa || 387 11
ataś ca ---- etair nivartitair dew tato ‘sau jāyate dvijaḥ | aviplutābhyāṅṁ brāhmaṇābhyām ekaṁ
vaidikair mantraṁḥ samskāraiś ca dvitīyaṁ yanma dvijasya yat siddhaṁ tad ubhayam apīhatyair
eva manṅtraiḥ kṛtam it ||

‘There are eight (that bestow) competence to be a Brahmin, and forty (additional

purifications). He states them in due order:

TANTRĀLOKA

”vratabandhaiṣṭike maujjīhhautike saumikaṁ kramāt I 501 1

godānam iti vedendusaṁskriyā brahmacaryataḥ l
““pratyudvāhaḥ pañcadaśaḥ sapta pākamakhās tv ataḥ || 502 |

..—1.Q._.
1) Impregnation (garbhādhāna), 2) the procreation of a male child (puhsavana), 3) the
parting of the hair (swīmantonnāyana), 4) the rite at birth (jātakarman), 5) the naming

(nāmakaraṇa) (of the baby), 6) the going out (uṣkrāmaṇa), 7) the first solid food (annapraśana).
and 8) tonsure (cāḍākarman). O fair lady, these eight are said to purfied with this same (method).

(SVT 10/386cd-387)

The parting of the hair (marks) the completion of (the differentiation and) division of
the primary and secondary limbs. The ‘going out’ (niṣkrāmaṇa) is seeing the sun (for the firṣṭ

time). Tonsure 1s the fashioning of the topknot. “With this same (method), that is, with the

method that has come down through the aforementioned succession by applying ten oblations
with (the Mantra of) the Lord Īśāna, who is the cause. Thus ‘O goddess, with these completed
he then becomes a Brahmin’ (SYT 10/388ab). Birth as a twice born (Brahmin) 1s achieved by two

untroubled Brahmins — one by Vedika mantras, and the second one by (these) purificatory rites

(samskāra). (It makes no difference). This is done for both of them (equally) with Vedic (laukika)

Mantras.’ see also SyT 2/203 ff
The first four saṅṣkāras, performed for the fire, are described, in some detail in the

SVT. 1) Impregnation (garbhādhāna) 2/203-204ab, 2) the procreation of a male child
(puṅsavanam) 2/204cd-206ab, 3) the parting of the hair (stmāntonnayana) 22206cd-214, and 4)
the rte of birth (jātakarman) 2/215-216.

”““15/503a is drawn from SvT 10/388cd-394 (which deals with the types of vratabandha), and

15/503bcd from 10/395-396 (the remaining five listed here). See below 15/506-510ab.
502a — SVT 10/396cd.
kir ca ----

tato bhavati godānaṁ taccaturdaśakam priye |ḷ
vedādhyayanānte upādhyāya gomithunadānenopalakṣitam ātmanaḥ keśādivapanaṁ godānam ||
Moreover: “O beloved, then comes the offering of cows, which is the fourteenth. The

offering of cows and the offerng of one’s own hair etc represented by the offering of two cows to
the teacher at the completion of the study of the Veda. (396cd)

7 502ab -SvT 10/395ab. See above note, where the passage 1s translated in full.

7 504a -SVT 10/397
atha gurubhir gārhasthyāyānujñātaḥ ----

snāta udyāhayed bhāryāṁ jñānasiddhaḥ kumārikām | (397ab)

vedādhyayanena labdhaśuddhīḥ snāta ucyate | adhyayanānte h snānam anenaiyāśayenā-mnātam,

ata evāyaṁ vedārthādhigamātmanā ñānena siddhaḥ sampūrṇaḥ || atha vā 'brahmacaryād eva

pravrajet iti coditatvāt śīghram eva prāvṛāryam icchan ----

kr̥tvā darbhamayīṁ patnīṁ tayā saha yajet kratā || 397 ||
grhasthāśramacoditanityanaimittikarāpam ittham udvāhātmakasaṁskārasampādanarāpam etat

karma ---- ta jñeyaṁ pañcadaśamah........... aṉeṉaiva ca ----

‘Now once he has been given the permisston by the teacher to assume the householder°s

state: ‘The one who has bathed and (in whom) knowledge is accomplished (by study), should

marry a young virgin (and have her as his) wife.’ (397ab) He is satd to be ‘one who has bathed’,

that is, one who has attained purity by the study of the Veda. Bathing at the completion of study is
taught in the tradition with this intentuon. Thus, he is completely successful (siddha) by virtue of

the knowledge which is the understanding of the meaning of the Vedas. Or else (t is said), ‘he

should go forth (as a renouncer) from the celibate (state). As this is enjoined with the desire (to
enter) quickly (the state of the renouncer who has) gone forth —
‘Having made (a simulacrum of) a wife made of darbha grass, he should celebrate the
sacrifices with her.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


caitrī cāśvayujī paścāt saptaiva tu havir makhāḥ || 503 |”

This Karma 1s 1n the form of the regular (nitya) and occasional (naimittika) rites
enjoined for the phase of life (aśrama) of the householder. In ths way it is the accomplishment of
the sacrament (saṁskāra) of marriage. “One should know that to be the fifteenth.’ (397c) By that:
pitṛdevamanuṣyāṇām bhūtānāṁ tarpaṇaṁ tathā |

brahmaṇo ʻdhyayanaṁ ceḥ mahāyajñās tu pañca vai ||
ũúti yajñasūtrapratipāditā nityayajāāḥ saṁgr̥hītāḥ | taduktaṁ ----

pañca sūnã gr̥hasthasya cullĩ pesaṇy upaskaraḥ |

khaṇḍanī codakumbhaśca badhyate yas tu vāhayan ||

tāsāṁ krameṇa sarvāsāṁ niṣkṛtyartham mahātmabhiḥ |

pañca kḷptā mahāyajñāḥ pratyahaṁ gr̥hamedhanām ||
adhyāpanaṁ brahmayayñaḥ púryajñas tu tarpaṇam |
homo daivo balir bhauto nryajño ʻhthhpūjanam ||

ity evam udvāhenavvante niṭyayajāḥ saṁgrahītā ity āśayah | 397 1|
‘In this way libation (is offered) to the ancestors, deities and men, as well as ghosts.

(These four, along with) study, for a Brahmin are the five great sacrifices.’

Theṣe are the regular sacrifices stated together (in brief) in the Yajñasūtra. That is said

(in the following passage):

‘Five (things symbolze) the offspring of a householder — the stove, grind-stone, an

article of household use, sugar-boiler (khanḍanī > khaṇḍika) and the coda jar (?). He who,

engaged in carrying (out his domestc duties) is troubled, five great sacrifices have been fashioned
by great souls in order to atone for all (defects). They are performed danly by householders who

perform the domestic rites. (These are:) study, which 1s the sacrfice of Brahmā The sacrifice to
the ancestors is the offering of libation. The offering of oblation is for the gods. Animal sacnfice
is for the ghosts, and the sacrfice to man is reverence for guests. The 1ntended sense is that, in

this way, by (the reference to) marriage, these regular sacrifices are included.

504bcd-505ab drawn from SvT 10/398bcd-399.
The Vedic domestic rites (pākamakha) are occasional rites performed by householders

in the course ofa year Kṣemarāja supplies a brief randown:

| pārvaṇī sitāsitapakṣādyadine,

tatratyo yāgas

tathoktaḥ | śrāddhaṁ putryādidmmokto vidhiḥ | śrāvaṇyāṁ yāgaḥ śrāvaṇī | āgrāyaṇī navānnayāgah

| evam caitryādir api boddhavyaḥ | anye tu āgrāyaṇīdvayam iti paṭhútvā śaradvasantayor

navānnayāgadvayam vyācakṣate, te ca pārvanaṁ śrāddham ekam eva varnayanti | ete ca

pākayajīñā vede tu puroḍāśādibhiḥ kāryā uktāḥ, vakṣyamāṇās tu havir yajñāḥ saktvādibhiḥ | iha
tu vśeṣānabhidhānāt prasutais úilair eva kāryā úi yñeyam || 399

‘The aṣṭakas are (called) Śāka etc , (and take place on the eighth day) of the dark lunar
fortúight, beginning with the month of Pauṣa. (Those performed during) the auspicious
conjunctons (of the planets) (pārvanī) are called the sacrifices that take place (on those

occasions,) during a lunar day of the bright or dark lunar fortnight. The offering to the ancestors

(śrāddha) is the prescribed rite taught for the days (sacred to) the ancestors. A sacrifice

(performed in the month of) Śrāvanṇī (is called) Śrāvaṇī. The Āgrāyanī is a sacrifice (performed to

celebrate the harvesting of) new food. One should know that the same (applies to those the
sacrifices named after the months of the year, that is) CaiT and Āśvayujī. Others who read that

there are two Āgrāyaṇīs say that there are two sacrifice (to celebrate the harvesting of) new food,
in the autumn and the spring. They explain that the sacred day and the rite for the ancestors is to

be read together (thus there is one less sacrifice listed to allow for two Āgrāyaṇīs). Theṣe are the

domestc sacrifices in the Veda that it is sad are to be performed with sacrificial cakes (puroḍāśa)

and the like. The fire sacrifices that will be taught (further ahead) are (performed by offering)

TANTRĀLOKA

ādheyam agnihotraṁ ca paurṇamāsaḥ sadarśakaḥ |

cāturmāsyaṁ paśūdbandhaḥ sautrāmaṇyā saha tv amī|| 504 ||
agniṣṭomo ‘tipūrvo ‘tha sokthyaḥ ṣoḍaśivājapau |

āptoryāmātirātrau ca saptaitāḥ somasaṁsthitāḥ l| 505 |

hiraṇyapādādimakhaḥ sahasreṇa samāvṛtaḥ” |
aṣṭatriṁśas tv aśvamedho gārhasthyam iyatā bhavet || 506 ||
vānasthyapārivrājye ca catvāriṁśad amī matāḥ |

dayā kṣamānasīūyā ca śuddhiḥ satkṛtimaṅgale || 507 |

-9d-D...........ā....Q.Q,

barley-meal (ṣaktu) and the like. Here, as no patculars ar mentoned, one should know that they
ar to be (performed) with sesame seeds as stated (previously).’ SYTu ad 10/338cd-339
7 505cd-506ab based on SYT 10/400cd-402ab Kṣemarāja explains these seven kinds of

sacrifices (yajīa); that is, 1) Aāgneya, 2) Agnihotra, 3) Darśa, 4) Paurṇamāsī, S5) Cāturmāsya,

6) Pasśubandha and 7) Sautrāman.

āgneyam araṇikrameṇāgnyānayanam | agnihotraṁ sāyaṁ prātaś ca homaḥ | darśo viparīta-

lakṣanayā.adṛśyamāṇacandra āmāvasyo yāgaḥ | cāturmāsyaṁ phālgunāt caitrād vā prabhṛti

māsacatuṣṭayānte paurṇamāsībhavo viśtṣṭo yāgaḥ | paurṇamāsīśaābdena tu sarvapaurnamāsī-

sataḥ sãmãnyayãga uktaḥ | paśubandho ’yāgaviśeṣo yatra paśor māṁsavasādi hūyate 1
sautrāmaṇúḥ sutrāmadevatākaḥ surāyāgaḥ ||

‘1) The installaton of the fite (āgneya) is the bringing of fie by the process (of
rubbing) firesticks (together). 2) The oblation to the fire (agnihotra) is the offering to the fi in

the morning and the evening. 3) The new moon (darśaka) (sacrifice) 1s the reverse (of the full
moon one). It 1s the sacrifice that 1s performed when the moon is not visible for new moon. 4) The

four-monthly rite (cāturmāsya) is a specal sacrifice performed for four months, beginning with

Phālguna or Caitra up to the fourth month after on the full moon. 5) The words ‘the sacrifice of

the full moon’ (paurṇamāsī) tefer to the common sacrifice that takes place on each full moon. 6)

The ammal sacnfice (paśubandha) is a partcular sacrifice in which the flesh etc. of a sacrficial
victim and the like 1s offered to the fire. 7) The rite dedicated to (Indra) the ‘good protector”

(sautrāmaṇī) is a sacnfice in which lquor (surā) 1s offered (surāyāga). SvT 10/400cd-402ab
506cd-507ab based on SVT 10/403-404a.

agniṣṭtomātyagniṣṭomau ukthyaḥ soḍaśīúkā tathā |

vājapeyo ‘tirātrastu āptoryāmas tu saptamah || 403 |1

ta ete yāgaviśeṣāḥ ---- somasaṅsthā samākhyātāḥ.............

grahakaraṇakasomapānayuktā yayñarūpāḥ krīyāḥ somasaṁsṭhāḥ lI
Theṣe particular sacrifices are ‘said to be a part of the Soma (sacrifice)’ (404a) Those
that are a part of the Soma (sacnfice) are rates in the form of sacrifices that include the drinkīng

of Soma, which brings about possession (graha).
7 507cd - SYT 10/404cd-406 — quoted in commentary.
7! 508ab — SVT 10/407cd-408ab.

aśvamedhaṁ tataḥ paścā] yuhuyāt tu yathākramam | 407 I|

brāhmaṇasyāpi karmavaśaprāptasārvabhaumabhāpatitvasyāyam aśvamedhaḥ
kārya eva | 407 | evaṁ vivāhāt prabhrṛti etāvad antaiḥ ---evar kṛtais tu taiḥ sarvais tataś catva gṛhī bhavet | 408ab
dvitīyāśramasthaḥ ||

‘After that, m due order, he should offer a horse sacntfice as oblation ’ (407cd) Even a
Brahmm who due to Karma attains the condition of a universal monarch should have this horse

sacrifice performed. In this way, begnnmg from (the sacrament of) marriage, ending with these,

‘having done them all in this way, he is thus a householder.’ (408ab). This is one who is in the

second phase of life (asśrama).


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


”1) (The first purifying rite is) impregnation (garbhādhāna),

(followed by) 2) the procreation of a male child (puṅṁīsavana), 3) the parting
of the hair (swīmantonnayana), 4) the birth rite (ātakarman), 5) the naming
(nāmakaraṇa) (of the baby), 6) going out (for the first time) (niṣkramaṇa),
7) the first solid food (annapraśana), and 8) tonsure (cāḍākarman), which is
the eighth. The taking of vows (vratabandha), (the four practices to observe
while learning the Veda, namely) 9) aiṣṭika, 10) pūrvika, 11) bhautika and
12) saumika, 13) (the shaving of the beard, along with) 14) the gift of cows.
(These are) the fourteen sacraments (administered) up to (the completion

of) student life. The fifteenth sacrament is marriage (udvāha).
After that come the seven domestic sacrifices (pākayajña), that is to
say, 16) (the sacrifices that should be performed on) the eighth lunar day
(aṣṭaka), 17) (those to be performed during) auspicious conjunctions (of the
planets) (pārvaṇī), 18) the offerings to the ancestors (śrāddha), the two, 19)

(performed in the month of) Srāvaṇa (śrāvaṇī) and 20) the two

agrahāyaṇī, 21) the one performed in the month of Caitra (caitrī), and 22)

the one performed in the month of Aśvayuj (the āśvayujī).

After this come the seven (solemn) oblations (havirmakha), that is,

23) the installation of the fire (agnyādheya), 24) the oblation to the fire
(agnihotra), 25) the sacrifice of the full moon (paurṇamāsa) and 26) (that of)

the new moon (darśaka), 27) the four-monthly rite (cāturmāsya), 28) the

animal sacrifice (paśubandha), 29) along with the rite dedicated to (Indra)
the ‘good protector’ (sautrāmaṇī).

The seven Soma sacrifices” are the 30) Agniṣṟoma, 31) the one
beginning with ati, 32) the Ukthya, 33) the Soḍaśin, 34) the Vājapeya, 35)
509 is based on SVT 10/410-411ab, where the eight good qualities of the soul are lssted. The

words used to denote the eight good qualties of the soul may be different in some cases, but the
meanings are the same. Kṣemarāja explains:
dayā parānukampā, kṣāntir apakāriṣu śaktatve ‘py apratikriyā, paraguṇasahatvam anasūyatā,

cittavākśarīraśuddhiḥ Śśaucam, akleśāvahakarmakārtvam anāyāsaḥ, maṅgalyadravyāṇāṁ
darśanasparśanacintanām maṅgalam, yathāśakúi dātrtvam akārpaṇyam, aspṛhā santoṣaḥ, ity ete
ātmana ātmasaṁnikr̥ṣṭasyāntahkaranavāgāder guṇāḥ, na tv ātmanas tasya cidekarūpatvāt

‘1) Compassion is sympathy for others. 2) Forbearance (kṣānti / kṣamā) is to refrain
from retaliation towards those who cause injury, although capable of doing so. 3) Freedom from
spite (anasĩyā) s tolerance of others' (bad) qualities. 4) Purity (śuddhī/śauca) is purity of mind,
speech and body. 5) Freedom from (tiring) exertion (anāyāsa) is doing work that does not entail
(painful) impediments. 6) (Doing what is) auspicious (mangala) is seeing, touching and thinking
about auspicious sacrificial substances. 7) Generosity (akārpaṇya) is to give (to others) as much
as one can. 8) Absence of craving (asprha) 1s contentment. These are the (good) qualities of the

Self, that is, of the mmner mental organ and speech etc. which are closest to the Self. (They are) not

(directly qualitis of) the Śelf, because its sole nature is consciousness.’

7 This list of forty-eight items in verses 502-509 (498-505) is taken from SvT 10/383-412cd
They are the forty saṁskāras and eight qualities of the soul listed in the Gautamadharmasūtra.

They are noted in Pandey, Rajbali 1969: 20.
Read niṣkramaṇaṁ for niṣkrāmaṇam.

” See Appendix to Chapter Six for the Indian lunar calendar.
7 SVṬ 400c reads āgneyar for ādheyah.

” Ṭheṣe are the seven standard modifications of the Jyoriṣoma sacrifice.

TANTRĀLOKA

the Āptoryāma, and the 36) Atirātra.’ Then comes 37) the Hiraṇyapāda

etc. sacrifice, which is repeated a thousand (times), and finally the horse

sacrifice (Aśvamedha), which is the thirty-eighth, with which one comes to
the end of the stage of the householder (gṛhastha). Then come the two

stages of 39) the forest dweller (vanaprastha) and 40) the renouncer

(saṁnyāsin).

After this come the eight qualities of the Self, that is, (41) 1)

compassion (for all creatures) (dayā), (42) 2) forbearance (kṣamā), (43) 3)
freedom from spite (anasūyā), (44) 4) purity (śuddhi), (45) 5) doing good (to

others) (satkṛti),™ (46) 6) (doing what is) auspicious (maṅgala), (47) 7)
generosity (akārpaṇya) (48) 8) and absence of craving (aspṛha). (500cd-

508ab) (498-505)

‘Going out’ (niṣkrāmaṇa) is (a period of time just after giving birth

that the mother and her baby are kept) out of sight (adarśana). ‘The taking of
vows’ (vratabandha) is the investiture of the sacred thread (upanayana).

‘Aiṣṭika’ are the four vows that must be observed while learning the Veda. ‘The
gift of cows’ is the gift to the teacher of a pair of cows at the end of the course
of the study of the Vedas, and the offering of one’s hair etc., which it (also)

secondarily

denotes.

(This

is

the)

fourteenth.

(As

is

said

in

the

Svacchandatantra): ʻthen O beloved, comes the gift of cows, which is the

fourteenth.' ‘After that’ means after marriage. ‘The offerings after death
(śrāddha)’ have as their object (one’s) dead father etc. ‘The two agrahāyaṇī
are the two sacrifices a year, in autumn and spring, for the new food (of the
harvest seasons). ‘The one beginning with ati’ is the Aryagniṣṭoma. The word
‘etc.’ (of Hiraṇyapāda etc.) indicates a form (of it). Thus, the Hiraṇyapāda
(‘Golden Foot’) is (a spring) sacrifice (performed in the month of) Caitra and is
often kinds. This is the meaning. It is ‘repeated a thousand (times) because

each one (of the ten kinds) is repeated a hundred times. That is said (in the


Svacchandatantra):


‘The Golden Foot is the first. Then (comes) the one who bears the

Golden Anus, (then come) the Golden Penis, the Golden Navel, the Golden

Womb, the Golden Ear, the Golden Skin, the Golden Eye, the Golden

Tongue, and its (Golden) Horn - these are said to be the ten sacrifices. Each one

is known here to be complete (vṛ1a) by (performing it) a hundred times.”

Read sokthyaḥ for soklayaḥ. The ukthya is a libation offered in the morming and midday
sacrifice, as well as the name ofa liturgical ceremony which forms part of the Jyotiṣṭoma.
” Concerning these sacrifices, see Renou, 1954, 5 v
507c Cf. SVT 10/404cd-406ab, which is quoted 1n the commentary. See note there.
“ Inṣtead of satkṛú- ‘doing good (to others), SYT 10/410c reads anāyāsa ʻwithout effortʼ.

Normally ‘going out’ 1s the occasion when the baby is taken out to see the sun and the moon
and the stars for the first time.
SyṬ 10/396cd.

Ḵ ṣemarāja explains: garbho hṛdayam. ‘The womb 1s the heart.

SVT 10/404cd-406. Here the last hne reads: śatena tu vṛtaṁ cātra ekaikaṁ tu vijãnate | `ẽach

one is known here to be complete (vr1a) by (performing it) a hundred times. The edition of the
SVT reads śatena tu ghṛtaṁ cātra ekaikaṃ tu vijāyate | 10/406cd
‘Clarified butter (offered) here a hundred times to each one triumphs.’


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


‘Compassion’

(dayā)

is

sympathy

for

other

(living

beings).

‘Forbearance’ (kṣānti) refraining from revenge, although capable of it, on
those who do wrong to you. ‘Doing good (to others) (satkṛti)’ is doing what is
good by undertaking readily (to do so). ‘(Pursuing what is) auspicious
(maṅgala) is taking care to observe what is (well) commended. (These are the

qualities of) ‘the self’. (In this case, this means) the inner mental organ, which

is proximate to the Self. It is not the Self (itself) directly, because that is one

with consciousness.
Here in this same (context), he presents other purifying rites included
amongst them.

īaāī āvgāĨsi arg ārzqTā- I| 40¢ 11

ĨTTTT 3 TTTTT TPITGTTS] |I 408. 1

STĪTRIRTGATTTĪIĪTT TCT |

ḍGHT

I:. āJṬāT; I| 4Q0

īkatczkaa ã̃ aar-aaftēlā̃ za |

TTHĨIĪĪĪĪI] TāTPĒTTĪSTT TṬG: |

rāīgfār ftōrttīarīr̥dsī: 1 ugç3 1.
mekhalā daṇḍam ajinaṁ tryāyuṣaṁ vahnyupāsanam || 508 II

Ṁ—- ......

..Ḷ.
gB
garbho hr̥dayam | ete pakṣyādyākārā agniciṭyāvśesā

yesāūṁ pādādisthāneṣu haraṇyaṁ dīyate || yeṣāṁ tattaipakṣyādyākṛtibhedāt ----

śatena tu ghṛtaṁ cātra ekaikaṁ tu vyāyate | 406 ||
etatsampattyarthaṁ home viśeṣam āha ---ete sarve sahasreṇa śuddhyante..…………...

sa eva sahasrahomasamprādyo hiraṇyapādādś cityayajāaḥ |

The womb is the heart. These are particular arrangements of the fire altar (agniciti) in
the form of a bid etc., to which gold is given where their feet etc. are located. As the the form of
each bird is different,
‘Clarified butter (offered) here a hundred times to each one triumphs.” (406cd)

that.

He explains the particular nature of the oblation (homa) (offered) in order to accomplish
‘They are all purified with a thousand (oblatons).’ (407a)

This is the tradition concerning the thousand oblations, that is, the sacrifice to the
foundation of bricks (from which the fire altar is fashioned), beginning with the Golden Foot.

Jayaratha reads kṣāntir, which means the same.

TANTRĀLOKA

saṁdhyā bhikṣeti saṁskārāḥ sapta sapta vratāni ca

"510 is a paraphrase of SVT 10/389cd-390ab. Inroduciṅg tas yerse with the previous lne and

contṉnuing with the ones that follow, the Śvacchantatantra states with Kṣemarājas

commentary:

‘In this way, for this Brahmun, ‘the ninth is the taking of vows.” (SVT 10/388c).
This 1s a samskāra. `And that is said to have ancillaries.’ (388d)
As that 1s so,
‘I will tell (you) its ancillaries, correctly and in due order. (389) He
lists them: `1) The
girdle (mekhalā), 2) the stick for the teeth, 3) a deer skin, 4) the
ʻtriple life (tryāyuṣa), 5)

sandhyā, 6) the attendance to the fire and 7) begging, which the (wise) know is
the seventh.”
(389cd-390ab)
The ‘tiple life’ is the three lines of ashes (made on the forehead)

vows of the girdle that the celibate student should observe.

These are the seven

‘0 fair-faced lady, these are seen to be obligatory regulators (of the new initiate's

behaviour) at the time of intiation.’ (390cd)

‘The time of initatton is the time marked by (seeing) the maṇḍala and the offering oṝ
the cows that wil take place (subsequenty). These ‘regulators' have not (yet
executed.
(Their purposc 1s that (the celibate sudent) who is in the firs stage (aśrama) (oṀ been)
life)
may
not be
lost, and so must certainly be observed. Moreover:
‘These seven vows are seen to be those of celibate students: 1) (The vow
of) Bhauteśa,
2) (that of) the Pāśupata, 3) (that of) the Gaṇa and 4) Gaṇeśvara, 5) Unmattak
a, 6) Asidhara and
7) Ghṛteśa. (391-392ab)
(JY 1/18/144-145 is a direct, lteral citation of SyT 10/389cd-390ab

fourteen vows are listed.)

and 391-392ab, in which the

(They) ‘are seen’ in the Supreme Lord's scripture and they are found in the Veda in the

vew (pakṣa) of (some) lost Vedic school (śākhā). In the first
case, (they are 1n the Śaiva
scriptures) because they must be observed.
‘They should be known to be the vows.” (392c)

They are to be observed for the time when the yows are taken. And they are ‘pratsed

as

ancillary. (392d) These are other vows that are ancillary to the samskāra
called ‘the taking of a
vow’ as the frut (of the vow) which 1s fruitful. Thus:

‘Along with these there is one, which 1s the nnth time a vow is taken. It is said that

group of seven vows is ncluded within that.’

thiṣ

In thiṣ way that is seven, beginning wih (the vow of wearg a) girdle, and those
beginning with (the vow of) Bhūteśa are (also) seven. Thus making:
(394ab)

‘0 fair-faced lady, one should offer to the fire (these) fourteen vows

in this way.’

The intended sense is that (they are observed) each separately, not Just by consideri

that other vows that have been taken are included (1n one of them).


Now:


‘Without a doubt, one should offer to the fire the four Vedic vows.

should be completed with an offering to the fire. He lists them:

‘(They are) aiṣtika, pūrvika, bhautika and saumika. (395ab)

ng

(394cd) They


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


bhauteśapāśupatye dve gāṇeśaṁ gāṇapatyakam || 509 ||

unmattakāsidhārākhyaghṛteśāni caturdaśa

ete tu vratabandhasya saṁskārā aṅginaḥ smṛtāḥ || 510 ||

pārivrājyasya garbhe syād antyeṣṭir iti saṁskṛtaḥ |

dvijo bhavet tato yogyo rudrāṁśāpādanāya saḥ || 511 |I
etāṉ prāṇakrameṇaiva saṁskārān yojayed guruḥ |

athavāhutiyogena tilādyair mantrapūrvakaiḥ || 512 I|

(Another) seven purifying rites (that are required for the patron of
a Vedic sacrifice — yajamāna — is that of) the girdle (mekhalā), staff
(danḍa), the skin of a black antelope (ajina), and the three red lines

(ryāruṣa), the worship of the fire, the rites at the three junctures of the
day (saṁdhyā), and giving alms. The seven vows are Bhauteśa, Pāśupatya,
Gāṇeśa, Gāṇapatya, Unmattaka, Asidhārā and Ghṛteśa. (Together the make)

fourteen. These purifying rites are considered to be auxiliaries to that of the

assumption of the vows (vratabandha), which is the main one. The last

sacrament (antyeṣṭi) (i.e., the funerary rite) is (administered) in the womb
of his condition as a renunciant. (508cd-511ab) (506-508)
Once (the disciple) has been purified (by these sacraments), he
becomes a ‘twice born’, who is thus fit to assume (the condition of) a limb
The vows that are to be observed at (certain times) are called by names such as ‘aiṣṭika’

in the Supreme Lord's scriptures, in accord with the reading of Vedic texts that expound the Soma
sacrifice that takes place at the sacred ume (parvan) of an 15ṭi (i.e. the offering of oblations of
butter and fruit etc.).


They are called in the (following) way mn the Yayāasūtra:


‘There are four Vedic vows, namely, 1) Belonging to the triple knowledge, the four-fold
fire offering, the offering of cows, and s0 too the bath - are four.’ The offering of cows wall be
(explained) here separately.
Out of the need for other vows to bestow the authority to study the Vedas, these are
(taught) as the main ones (for that purpose):
(395cd)

‘The Lords of the Vows who regulate (the conduct) of celibate students are four.”

The (vows) regulate (the conduct) of celibate students and bestow upon them the right

condtion (tathātva). Wth that in this way at the end (of the series), such are the saṅṣkāras: ‘One

should know that they are thurteen.’ (396a) One who has attended on this practice with these, is
given authority (to access) the Vedas. Accordingly, he says: ‘thus, indeed, he (comes to) possesses

the Vedas.’'(396b)

Moreover: ‘“O beloved, then comes the offering of cows, which 1s the fourteenth ’
(396cd)
The offering of cows is the offering of one’s own hair etc. (as symbolic of seed that has been)
sown represented by the offering of two cows to the teacher made at the completion of the study

of the Veda.
511 is drawn from SVT 10/391. See previous note for text.
ṢYṬ 10/389cd-390ab reads dantakāṣṭam — the stick to brush the teeth instead of danḍam.
Read with the SVT ajinaṁ for ajina and tryāyuṣaṁ for tryāyuṣe, which literally means ‘marked
red in three places. The same emendation is required in Jayaratha’s commentary.

See below, Chapter Twenty-four.
Although the funerary rite is considered to be a purification, it is only adminiṣtered to a person
whilst still alive as a part of the rites performed when he assumes the condition of a renunciant.
Thus, it is said to be admṛnistered when he is in the womb, about to be born into that state.

TANTRĀLOKA

of Rudra (rudrāṁśa). These purifying rites should be conferred upon him
by the teacher either by means of the procession of the vital breath

(prāṇakrama) or by means of oblations with sesame seeds etc.," along with
the (appropriate) Mantras. (511cd-512) (509-510ab)

‘The three red linesʼ are the sectarian mark made of ashes made on the

forehead (pundraka). As is said (in the Svacchandatantra concerning the
assumption of the vows):
“The ninth is the observance of vows (vratabandha), which is said to

possess (various) ancillaries (argin).

‘These’, forty-eight (purifying rites).
He (now) clarifies the statement that (the purifying rites are conferred)
along with the (appropriate) Mantras.

The Mantra Used for the Sacraments

Tj N] ṬĪḤTÇTTTT: ṬT: II u23 1|
praṇavo hṛdayaṁ nāma śodhayāmy agnivallabhā |

evaṁ krameṇa mūrdhādyair aṅgair etat" punaḥ puṇaḥ || 513 ||

(The Mantra used for the sacraments consists), in due order, of
OM, the Heart,
the name (of the disciple) followed by ‘I purify’ (Sodhayāmi)
along with (SVAHA), the beloved of the fire (agnivallabhā), repeated again

and again with the limbs beginning with the Heart." (513) (510cd-511ab)

‘The Heart’ is the (limb) associated with the (five) limbed Vidyā
(vidyāṅga). Thus, one can infer that for each purification five offerings should
be made to the fire with the group of five Vidyāṅgas in this way. Accordingly, it
is said that (it should be repeated) ‘again and again’ʼ.
Surely (one may ask), why is it said that by attaining the status of a
‘ṭwice-born’, he is fit to assume (the condition of) a limb of Rudra (rudrāṁśa)?

With this doubt in mind, he says:


See above, 13/295cd-300 and concerning Rudra’s devotee as a rudrāmśa.
t Oblattons are made with sesame seeds smeared with butter and clarified butter. See SVT
10/413.

Monier-Williams translates pundraka as a mark or line made on the forehead with ashes or
colouring substances to distinguish Vaiṣnavas from Śaivas etc, a sectarian mark’.
ṢVṬ 10/388cd. see note 15,807.

Read eat for atat.

" Emend mārdhādyair to hṛdyādyair. Jayaratha is clearly commenting on the emended reading.

Gnoli translates: “(The sacraments are conferred) by the successive and repeated utterance of the

Mantra OMṀ, the five limbs of Mantra, beginning with the Heart, the name (of the discplē)
followed by ‘I purify’ (śodhayāmi) and with the Mantra SVĀHĀ (agnivallabha) ”


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------

What Makes a Brahmin a Brahmin

yataś ciddharma evāsau śāntyādyātmā dvijanmatā |
tena rudratayā saṅvit tatkrameṇaiva jāyate || 514 |I
As the condition of being ‘twice-born’ is a quality of consciousness,
and consists of (the virtues of) tranquillity and the rest, (it comes first); (the
disciple’s state of) consciousness as that of Rudra arises successively (after

that). (514) (511cd-512ab)

‘The condition of being ‘twice-born’ is a quality of consciousness,

consisting of an accumulation (of virtues,) because it arises as (the virtues) of

tranquillity and the rest, in accord with the view that (a Brahmin is) ‘tranquil,
restrained (ḍdānta), and has conquered anger . . .’ Thus, because the perception
of having attained the condition of being ‘twice born’ accords with the extent
(they have been) accumulated, ‘(the state of) consciousness as that of Rudra
arisesʼ. The sense is that he is fit to attain (the condition of being Rudra’s) limb.
He induces (us) to take the teaching to heart by means of an example.

qaṛḷ ṜTTRTTṬTī TIṀ TaTI-RTT |

yathā hemādidhātūnāṁ pāke kramavaśād bhavet |

rajatādi tathā saṁvitsaṁskāre dvijatāntare || 515 ||
Just as in the course of processing (pāka) the substances (that

produce) gold and the like, silver and other (precious metals appear first),

similarly in the course of purifying consciousness, the condition of a ‘twicebornʼ (appears) as an intermediate stage. (515) (512cd-513ab)

Just as when the particular substances from which gold, for example, is
produced are being processed, that condition (finally) arises by the successive
aṭṭtainment of (the intermediate stages,) such as silver, (that lead to it), in the

same way, when consciousness is being purified, ‘the condition of a ‘twicebornʼ’ (appears) as an intermediate stage’. The sense is that by (undertaking
to) achieve that first, one (ultimately) attains (the condition of) being (one of)

Rudra’s limbs.

Surely (one may ask), it is said that one who is ‘twice born’ is born into

the condition of a Brahmin that is not a fallen one (avipluta), because a Brahmin

is one who is not fallen. How is it that this is said (to be s0)? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

TANTRĀLOKA

yonir na kāraṇaṁ tatra śāntātmā dvija ucyate |
(Birth in a particular) womb is not the cause there (in that case,
whereby one is a Brahmin). It is said that (a true) Brahmin is one who is
peaceful by nature (irrespective of his caste). (516ab) (513cd)

says:

Surely (one may ask), who has said this? With this doubt in mind, he

ft- ṃraīarēīṝeā sr ṟ: HIHTSAI]
muninā mokṣadharmādāv etac ca pravivecitam || 516

This has been discussed by the sage (Vyāsa) in the Mokṣadharma"

and elsewhere. (516cd) (51l4ab)

As he has said (there):


‘He who has understood all this, both Nature and (its) modifications,

and knows the condition (gati) of all living beings, the gods consider him to be a
Brahmin. Without fear of any living being, because he is not frightening for
anybody, (knowing himself to be) the (very) Self of all living beings, the gods
consider him to be a Brahmin.
Even a man of low caste (śūdra) who is virtuous and possesses (good)
qualities is a Brahmin. Even a Brahmin who is devoid of good actions

(kriyāhīna) is even lower than a man of low caste. O Yudhiṣṭhira, one should

give a donation (dāna) (vast) without measure to one who has crossed the

terrible ocean of the five senses, even though he is low caste. O king, (a man's)
caste is not apparent (nor need one look to it). (It is his good) qualities that give
riṣe to beneficial (and auspicious results, not his caste status).


Nor is this said just by him (alone). Thus, he says:


:z ḷ

aI īart fn= TṬāq |

mukuṭādiṣu śāstreṣu devenāpi nirūpitam |

(514cd)

It is also taught by God in scriptures such as the Mukuṭa. (517ab)

This is the name of a section of the twelfth book of the Mahābhārata, from chapter 174 to the
end (see, for example, 256, 31-32). Several passages from the scrptures that present the true

nature of a Brahmun in this sense are collected 1n the Vajrasūcī.

This line is found only in MS Th. Itreads' brāhmaṇo ’pi kriyāhīnaś śūdrād apy avaro bhavet |
l Erom the Mokṣadharma of the Sānthparvaṉ of the Mahābhārata.

' Cf. PTV p. 237: jātīnāṁṅ ca brāhmanādīnāṁ nāsúi ṣthitiḥ — kalpitatvāt upadeśavyaṅgateti tu

durbuddhīn paśūn pratyāyayet — iti ca bhagavatā mukuṭasaṁhitāyāṅṁ viṣtarato nirītam iha tu
ayatnasiddham eva |


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------



That is said there (in the Mukuṭāgama) īn many ways:

‘The adept (sādhaka) who follows Śiva’s law (śivadharma), possesses

faith, and is Śiva by nature, a devotee of Śiva, (spiritual) knowledge and the

teacher, is loved . his fellow students, is free from spite, has perceived reality
and is purified in Siva’s sacrifice, though he be of the lowest caste and deformed
(hīnāṅga), is liberated. One who does not possess these qualities, even though
he is a Brahmin, is not liberated. One who is deceitful, even if he is a Brahmin,
should be avoided, whereas an outcaste foreigner (mleccha) who is not should
be accepted. He is loved
by the Great God, not (one who knows) the four Vedas
(but) is deceitful, hates Siva, acts sinfully, and criticizes Siva’s law and the like.

(If) what a Brahmin does is sinful and what a man of low caste does is good, is

it taught that there (in such cases, of actions that are in accord) Dharma and
those that are not, the cause is caste?”
Surely (one may ask), this (view) is contrary to other scriptures such as
the smṛtis, so how (can this view) be established? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

fēēī ā’aTāçTAGTTRAT] II 42. 11

saṅvido dehasaṁbhedāt sadrṛśāt sadṛśodayāt || 517 ||
bhūmābhiprāyataḥ smārte dvijanmā dvijayoḥ sutaḥ |
There is a general consensus in the smārta (lawbooks) that a

Brahmin is a person born from two Brahmins. This is because
consciousness is associated with the body, and that which is born from
something is generally similar to it. (5S17cd-518ab)

In terms of the association of consciousness with the body, the cause of

the arising of something is similar, that is, does not fall away (from its own

nature) to that from which it arises, which (also) does not fall away (from its
own nature). It is for this reason that the most generally accepted view of the

smṛtis is that the offspring of two Brahmins is said to be a Brahmin.

Surely (one may ask), how is it said here that (this is so) for the most
part? With this doubt in mind, he says:

3esr ā- fē īāī īSr-T 1|

antyajātīyadhīvādijananījanmalābhataḥ || 518 II

utkṛṣṭacittā ṛṣayaḥ kũṁ brãhmaṇyena bhãjanam |
‘The Lord has explained extensively in the Mukutasaṁhúā that castes such as

‘brahmin’ and the rest do not exist because they are (just) conceived notions’ (and) ‘deformed

instruction may convince (only) fettered fools’.

TANTRĀLOKA

(However, this is not an invariable rule, for) how is it that (those)

high-minded seers (rṣi) (who are) born from mothers of fishermen (dhīva)

and other such low castes possess the nature (and status of) Brahmins
(brāhmaṇya)? (518cd-519ab)
(Such) ‘seersʼ are, for example, Vyāsa.

It is with this intention that caste and the like is not accepted in our
system (darśana). Accordingly, he says:

TḠATYI ST-TRTTTITY f mIB |

ata evārthasattattvadeśiny asmin na diśyate || 519 |l
rahasyaśāstre jātyādisamācāro hi śāmbhave |
Thus, the common observance (samācāra) of caste and the like is
not taught in these secret scriptures, that come from Śiva (śāmbhava) and

teach the true nature of things. (519cd-520ab)

Surely (one may ask), if that is so, why is that not said in the smṛtis etc.
also? With this doubt in mind, he says:

kÑCIEHḤfMIEēḷṉ TIHRITCĀĪHĪTGĪH
II| 420

|l

pāśavāni tu śāstrāṇi vāmaśaktyātmakāny alam || 520 |
sṛṣṭyādisiddhaye śaṁbhoḥ śaṅkā tatphalakīrptaye |
The scriptures of the fettered (where these matters are taught) are

essentially the (evil) energy, Vāmā. Doubt (exists) so that Śiva may bring
about the creation (sṛṣti) etc. (of daily life,) and to fashion the consequence

of that. (520cd-521ab)

‘Creation (sṛṣṭi) etc.’ is the business of daily life (lokavyavahāra). (The

forms of) doubt are stated in such (passages) as, ‘the doubt (concerning) caste

Caste, which is denied by the Trika and other Kulas, is āccepted in southern Śaivism. See

Brunner-Lachaux, 1964. See below, 15/595cd-601ab. Also, MVV 1/196cd-197ab. Also, the

Mukutāgama quoted ad 15/51ácd (old numberiṇg). Sanderson has made a survey of

pronouncements in the full range of early Śaiva sources. A summary of their locations and

contents is in ‘Tantric Śaiviṣm and Caste’ (handout for a lecture delivered at the Unversity of
Vienna 7" June 2009).

A less lteral translation conveys the sense better: ‘Ambiguous notions (concerning caste, for

example) have been created by Śiva to regulate people’s behaviour and provide them with the
appropriate fruīts (of the1r actons).”


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


and the doubt (concerning the sacrificial) substance . . .' ‘The consequences
of that’ are heaven and hell etc.

Having thus said that by the way, he (goes on to again) talk about the
main point:

TZITVITIGT
aĠ-T TTAĀĪ TTṆaT JaT] 1|I 422 1II

āpādītadvijatvasya dvādaśānte nijaikyataḥ || 521 ||
sparśamātrān na viśrāntyā jhaṭity evāvarohataḥ |
rudrāṁśāpādanaṁ yena samayī saṁskṛto bhavet || 522 ||
(The disciple who has) achieved the status of a Brahmin by virtue of
his own oneness, (attained) within the End of the Twelve by just (a fleeting)
contact with it, not by resting within it, descends from it immediately,
thereby attaining (the condition of a devotee who has become) Rudra’s

limb (ruḍrāṁśa), and so the regular initiate (samayin) is purified (and
empowered) (saṁskṛta). (521cd-522) (519-520ab)

He should ‘not rest within it’, for in that case he would be conjoined to
Supreme Śiva. This is the sense.
Surely (one may ask), what happens to one who has been purified in
this way? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TÑJĀTTGTIS-Ī TṬēŪīī fāyīr=tziq I| 433 1II
adhītau śravaṇe nityaṁ pūjāyāṁ guruṣevane |
samayy adhikṛto ‘nyatra guruṇā vibhum arcayet || 523 |I
This quarter verse seems to be drawn from the Niśātanatantra. A passage from that Tantra
concerning the types of doubt is quoted above ad 13/197-198, where a passage from the
Niśātanatantra īis quoted. There six kinds of doubt are listed. Although ‘the doubt (concerning)
caste’ is not amongst them, Jayaratha takes the trouble to note, most probably basing himself on

the same text, that it is a subvariety of the doubt concerning the offering of Kaula sacrificial
substances. As these include wine and bodily substances, Brahmins may feel inhibiting doubts

about offering them.
Concerning the devotee of Rudra as a rudrāṁśa, see above, 13/295cd-300 and note 13,327.
Sanderson (2006a, p. 191) ‘A memory of the connection of the samayadīkṣā with the Pāśupata

tradition from which the Saiva evolved by extension via the Lākula is preserved, I believe, in the

Agamic doctrine of the destiny of those who receive only the samayadīkṣā in their lifetimes. They
are said to achieve at death the lesser liberation (aparā mukti), which is to enter the level of Iśvara

between Śuddhavidyā and Sadāśiva in the Pure Universe. This is the point of liberation assigned
by the Niśvāsa and the Svacchanda to the Pāśupatas. Elsewhere they are said to become Rudreśas

or to attain the rudrapadam. And the rites which supplement the samayadīkṣā in certain Agamas

have as their goal the transformation of the initiate into a Rudrāṁśa’. See introduction to SŚP 3, p.
Xxxiil.

TANTRĀLOKA

A regular initiate who has been rendered fit to regularly study, hear
the scriptures, (to perform regular daily) rite (pūjā) and serve the teacher,
should, on other occasions, worship the All-pervasive Lord with (his)

teacher.” (523) (520cd-521ab)

‘Elsewhere (on other occasions)’ are the occasional rites (naimittika)

etc. As is said:

‘The teacher should perform (all) three (types of rites), that is, the
regular (daily ones) and the rest (i.e., occasional and intentional), whereas the
adept (may perform) just the regular one.® For as long as he lives, the other two

(may be performed only) at Śiva’s command.

Surely (one may ask), should he listen (to the scriptures) or study
(them)? Taking this doubt into consideration, he begins to declare the (rules

and) pledges (samaya) (the initiate should observe).

The Pledges (samaya)
The Eight Groups of Eight Pledges According
to the Devyāyāmala

3TRĪRAHGI-<TTTĪHGVṬC] EEAĒIE

I| 4ṜY 11

̄Tṁ ṃrē̄ lā ūāTTATRaRTTaAT || u2U ||

tam āpāditarudrāṁśaṁ samayān śrāvayed guruḥ |
aṣṭāṣṭakātmakān devyāyāmalādau nirāūpitān || 524 ||
avādo ‘karaṇaṁ gūḍhiḥ pūjā tarpaṇabhāvane |
hananaṁ mohanaṁ ceti samayāṣṭakam aṣṭadhā || 525 ||
"(Now) the teacher should tell (the disciple, who has thus by his

devotion) become Rudra’s limb (rudrāṁśa), the sixty-four pledges
The meaning of this line is not clear to me. The word ‘guruṇā’ means ‘with the teacher° or ‘by

the teacherʼ, assuming an unstated ‘by the teacher's permission’. It seems from Jayaratha’s
citation from the MV that this is how he understood the meaning. A third possibility is ‘as
the
teacherʼ, but that makes little sense. So, the most probable sense is that the regular initiate who
can only perform the daily regular rites of worship may participate in other types of rites with his
teacher.

This verse is MV 1/49. It is also quoted below in TĀv ad 28/4. Read with MS Th, the citation

below and the MV nityam eva for nityam evarṁ.
̄T MV 1/49.

Just after the neophant has received initiation, he is normally told the rules he must follow,

which he accepts as pledges — samaya — that he must keep. Accordingly, as part of the conclusion
of the rites of initiation, this long section from 525cd to 613ab (521cd-609ab) deals
with the
observance of the pledges (samayācāra). Here Abhinavya presents the precepts taught in
as many


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


(samaya) described in the Devyāyāmala and other (scriptures). There are
eight groups of pledges (samayāṣṭaka) (each of which consists of) eight
(rules). (They are:) 1) what is not to said (avāda), 2) what is not to be done
(akaraṇa), 3) (what is to be) kept hidden (giḍdhi), 4) (what should be)
worshipped (pūjā), 5) (to whom is offered) libation (tarpana), 6) (whom one
as eleven Trika and Krama Tantras. The former are marked with a single asterisk, the latter with a
double one. They are: Devyāyāmala: 15/525cd-535ab (521cd-531ab); Gamatantra 15/535cd-

536 (531cd-532); Mādhavakula 15/537 (533), 15/575-577ab (571-573ab); Unknown: 15/538544ab (534-540ab); Triśirobhairavatantra 15/544cd-549 (540cd-545); Sṛīṣāra ī.e. Trikasāra
15/550-557ab (546-553ab); Gamatantra 15/557cd-566 (551cd-562); Ūrmikaulārṇava 15/567-

574 (563-570), 15/577cd-594ab (588cd-590ab); Ānandaśāstra - 15/592cd-596 (588cd-592),

15/605cd-608ab (601cd-604ab); Kuḻaratnamāḷā 151598 (594); Kulagahvaratantra 15/599-600ab
(595-596ab); Niśisaṁcāratantra 15/600cd-601 (596cd-597) and Nakuleśa’s teachings 15/608cd-

613ab (604cd-609ab).

The teacher normally tells the samayin the rules / pledges (samaya) he must observe just

after he has received initiation. Accordingly, Abhinava deals with this here. The MV does not

present the rules at all, and so Abhinava has had to draw from other authoritative Trika or Krama
related Tantras. In this context, the foremost of these is the Devyāyāmala, which contains the most
systematic presentation of the Rules. Abhinava also refers to the Gamatantra (which is a Trika
source) and the Mādhavakula of the Jayadrathayāmala (which is related to the Krama), and draws
from the Triśirobhairava (which is Trika). He also draws from the Ūrmikaulārṇava, and to a
lesser extent the Kularatnamālā, the Rātrikula and Ānandatantra. Clearly, Kaula traditions are not
‘transgressive’ and ‘antinomian’ in the sense that there are no rules. These are all Trika Kaula and
Kālīkula sources. They are ‘supremely nondualist’ because they don’t accept that caste
distinctions and degrees of purity are an inherent part of the nature of people and things.
Although this subject is missing in the MV, it is a common one in major Tantras,

whether Siddhānta (from which Abhinava does not draw, except the Mukuṭasaṁhitā quoted above
in note 15,822). Thus, chapter 37 of the Kumārikākhaṇḍa of the Manthānabhairava, a Kubjikā

Tantra, is dedicated to the same subject, i.e. the Rule to be observed by Kula Yogis, much of
which is in common with SSS 41 (see Dyczkowski 2009: vol 10, p. 168-180 and vol 11, p. 125-

128). It comes there, as Abhinava has placed it here, after a presentation of the basic rite of

initiation (samayadīkṣā) which, as its name itself suggests, is an initiation into the observance of
the Rule. See MBT vol. II note 9 p. 125-128 ff for an analysis of the pledges in the Kubjikā
Tantras. These are often presented, as in the Devyāyāmala etc., in eight groups of eight. This is
what we find, for example, in SSS 17/160-183ab. The entire passage is translated op. cit.
Concerning the Rules taught in the Svacchandatantra see S√T vol. 2 pp. 36-38 and 328-32 (for

parallel Saiddhāntika samaya) and vol. 3 pp. 38-43 (for more Kaula samaya).

The model of eight pledges (samaya) is found in Siddhānta parallels also. The following
is presented by Wallis (2014) p. 249 n 633 as a summary of Śiddhāantasārapaddhati (A 30r6-v4,
B 39r6-v5). Wallis explains that the rules belong to two categories, the samaya and samayācāra.
‘The first follows: “1. do not speak ill of Śiva, 2. or of his teachings, 3. or those who teach

(Śaivism), 4. or of his worshippers; 5. do not step on the shadow of liṅga, 6. or on any substance
that has been offered to God, 7. do to eat any such substance, 8. or eat food touched by an unclean

woman.” And the second is given only to nirvāṇadīkṣita: “1. Do not teach the mantras or rituals to

uninitiated persons, 2. do not allow them to be copied down, 3. do not initiate someone without

śaktipāta (apatitaśāktikaṁ na dīkṣayet). 4 and 5. Do not eat without offering the food to Śiva, the
fire and one’s guru. 6. Feed guests, the poor, and the unfortunate, and scavenging animals too. 7.

Offer extra worship on festive days; and 8. be loyal to one’s fellow initiates at all times, regardless

of rank; protect lay devotees and anyone in danger, sick or mentally ill.” Additionally, on aṣṭamī,
caturdaśī, and the full and new moons, he should abstain from fish, meat, sex, anointing the body

with oil and shaving.” We note in passing that one of the striking differences is that the Kaula

pledges emphasize the honouring of women and rejection of the conventional norms enjoining
purity, and strongly guard the dignity of lower castes and others considered to be unclean.
Although both sets of pledges contain several not to disparage and criticize the sacred. Notice also
that secrecy is no less a concern for the Siddhānta than it is for the Kaula and related Tantras.

See above, 13/295cd-300 and note 13,327.

TANTRĀLOKA

should) respect (bhāvana), 7) (what one should) strike down (hanana), and

8) (who is to be) driven mad (mohana). (524-525) (521cd-523ab)

He presents the eight group of eight (rules) (stated) there (in the

Devyāyāmala with the words) ‘what is not said (avāda)ʼ etc.

GTWT H-T-TTI] TTĀTTNHGĀĒÑ |
TJqTGTT TĪHĒTṬHTT TRHI TT II 4RṜ /II

T aITNq II 42.9 |1|

qHTH-TTT-TĪT-ŪĪĀTṀZIT TGTT II 42¢ 11

YHTITTG
JaTTIĪ Ṁē¢aīg ātāq I1 u30 11

āTRJTFṬTĪJ TṬRATJTI] WITaTT I| 432 ||

TṬ]ḹ ṞTŪgaī a ggrarzīrrṛfzaṁ |

qITTTṬṬJTÑTTG-TIIT ĀITIT II 432 1|

TāTJTTSTTTITĪT-ī-TTTA TTRĀTT | II 433 1
svabhāvaṁ mantratantrāṇāṁ samayācāramelakam |
asatpralāpaṁ pauruṣyam anṛtaṁ nāṣṭadhā vadet || 526 ||
aphalaṁ ceṣṭitaṁ hiṁsāṁ paradārābhimarśanam |
garvaṁ dambhaṁ bhũtaviṣavyādhitantraṁ na cãcaret || 527 |I|
svaṁ mantram akṣasūtraṁ ca vidyāṁ jñānasvarūpakam |
samācārānguṇān kleśān siddhilīṅgāni gūhayet || 528 |I
guruṁ śāstraṁ devavahnī jñānavṛddhāṁ striyo vratam |
guruvargaṁ yathāśaktyā pūjayed aṣṭakaṁ tv idam ||/ 529 ||
dīnān kliṣṭān pitṜn kṣetrapālān prāṇigaṇān khagān |
śmāśānikaṁ bhūtagaṇaṁ dehadevīś ca tarpayet || 530 ||
Śivaṁ Śśaktiṁ tathātmānaṁ mudrāṁ mantrasvarūpakam |
saṁsārabhuktimuktīś ca guruvaktrāt tu bhāvayet || 531 ||
rāgaṁ dveṣam asūyāṁ ca saṅkocerṣyābhimānitāḥ |
samayapratibheṭtṜṁs tadanācārāṁś ca ghātayet || 532 ||
paśumārgasthitān krūrān dveṣiṇaḥ piśunāñ jaḍān |
rājñaś cānucarān pāpān vighnakartRṁś ca mohayet || 533 ||


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


(1) (The initiate should not talk about) the nature of (his) mantras
and Tantras, the rules, (his) conduct (ācāra), the gatherings (of Siddhas and

Yoginīs, nor should he indulge in) false (idle) talk, (utter) harsh (words)

and untruth. (These) eight things he should not say.
(2) (The eight things) he should abstain from are: conduct that is
fruitless and harmful, thinking about the wives of others, pride, fraud,
(harming others,) and practicing the Tantra concerned with evil spirits,

poison and disease.
(3) (The eight things the initiate) should keep hidden are: himself,
(his) mantra, rosary, (his) Vidyā, the nature of (his) knowledge, the (good)

qualities of (his) common (daily) conduct (samācāra), impediments (and
defects) (kleśa), and signs of accomplishment.

(4) He should worship to the best of his ability these eight: the
teacher, the scripture, the deity and fire, those who have grown old in
(Śaiva) knowledge (jñānavṛddha), women, (his) vow, and the teacher’s
family (guruvarga).
(5) He should offer libation to the wretched (dīna), the afflicted, the

ancestors, the guardians of place (kṣetrapāla), living beings, birds, the host

of ghosts who reside in cemeteries, and the goddesses in the body.

(6) He should respect (and contemplate) (bhāvayet) (as learnt) from
the teacher’s mouth Śiva, (His) Power, the Self, (ritual) Gesture (nudrā),

the nature of Mantra, transmigratory existence, (worldly) enjoyment and
liberation.

(7) He should strike down (ghātayet) attachment, hate, grumbling,
cowardice, envy, pride, those who infringe the rules, and those who do not

practice them.

(8) He should drive mad (and thereby chastise) (mohayet) those who

are on the path of the fettered, cruel people, the resentful, traitors, the
foolish, the followers of kings, sinners, and those who cause obstacles.
(526-533) (523cd-531ab)
‘The rules are each a secret sacrificial rite (rahasyayāga), and (the
initiate’s) ʻconduct” (ācāra) is (his) action which is appropriate to that. ‘He
should abstain fromʼ, that is, He should not do. (He should keep) ‘(his)

knowledge’ (hidden); that is, his erudition and the like, as a way of exalting

himself. (So too) ‘the nature (of his) insight (into reality)ʼ, that is, knowledge
of (ultimate) reality. (He should worship) ‘the vow’, that is, his own gesture
(mudrā) etc. (He should offer libation to) ‘living beings’, that is, cows etc. The
manner in which he contemplates ‘(the true nature of) transmigratory
existence is that ‘this is nothing at all’. ‘Hate’ is (an inner) burning.

‘Grumblingʼ (asūya) is ascribing defects to (other peoples’ good) qualities.
‘Envyʼ is intolerance of othersʼ excellence.

Read with Th, pauruṣyam for paruṣam.
The text reads pāpān, which means ‘sins’. I take this to be an irregular contraction of pāpinḥ —
‘sinnersʼ made for the sake of the metre.

TANTRĀLOKA

More Rules

: 1| ,3 1

:sēitii Erī |

śākinyaḥ pūjanīyāś ca tāś cetthaṁ śrīgamoditāḥ |
sāhasaṁ dviguṇaṁ yasmāt kāmaś caiva caturguṇaḥ || 534 |
lobhaś cāṣṭaguṇas tāsāṁ śaṅkyaṁ śākinya ity alam |
kulāmnāyāsthitā vīradravyabāhyās tu ye na taiḥ || 535 |

paśubhiḥ saha vartavyam iti śrīmādhave kule |

(The witches called) Śākinīs should be venerated,“ and as the

illustrious Gamatantra has said of them: ‘as they are™” twice as audacious,

their passion four times more and greed eight times more, one should be
wary of them. (Just saying) “Śākinīs!” (disrespectfully) is enough (to evoke
their wrath).”

According to the venerable Mādhavakula, (the initiate) should not
keep the company of those fettered souls who do not belong to the Kula
traditions (kulāmnāya), excluded (from them by their aversion) to the
hero’s sacrificial substances. (534-536ab) (531cd-533)
(Śākinīs are) ‘twice asʼ (audacious) with respect to other women.
Rules Relating to the Manner a Disciple Should
Behave with his Teacher

ṜGTTTISṬĀTTTVITS TTHITGRTĀAT II 43ē 11

fkēārft vrarāq 1

Ṛead kulāmnāyāsthitā for kulāmnāyasthitā.
Ṛead with the JY vartavyam for vastavyam.

‘ Śākiṇīs are kinds of witches. Accordng to the AgP (S0/38) they have an ‘oblique look’
(vakradrṣṭi, i.e., the evil eye. See Mallmann (1963: 204-206). Reformed, they are yoginīs who

are embodiments of Śiva’s energies, as happens 1n the Pañcavāha of the Krama system, which is

populated by 65 Śākinīs. The highest is Maṅgalā, who is identified with Kālasamkarṣ1ṇī.
Read with MS Th: yasmāt for yāsāṁ.

See below, 29/56. The Mādhavakula 1s the fourth ṣatka of the Jayadrathayāmala. Abhinava is
paraphrasing the following verse:
kulāmnāyesu ye ‘saktā ebhir dravyair vahṣkṛtāḥ |
paśavas te samuddiṣtā na teṣu saha vartanam | JY 4/21/60 (MS K fl. 139b, Kh f. 130a, G: fl.
171a).


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


īrmfērī qT d̃ gā1 Ṭ̄JŪ-T: II 438 II

devatācakragurvagniśāstraṁ sāmyāt sadārcayet || 536 ||
aniveditam etebhyo na kiñcid api bhakṣayet |
etad dravyaṁ nāpahared guruvargaṁ prapūjayet || 537 ||
sa ca tadbhrãtrbhãryãtukprãyo vidyākṛto bhavet |
na yonisaṁbandhakr̥to laukikaḥ sa paśur yataḥ || 538 ||
tasyābhiṣyaṅgabhūmis tu gurvārādhanasiddhaye |
arcyo na svamahimnā tu tadvargo guruvat punaḥ || 539 ||
%(The regular initiate) should always worship the assembly (cakra)
of deities, the fire, and the scriptures, as the common (sāmya) (practice)."

He should not eat anything that has not been offered to them." He should

not steal (apaharet) the sacrificial substance" (offered) to them. He should
worship the teacher’s (spiritual) family (guruvarga). (He should be aware
that) that is (his spiritual family,) consisting of his brothers, wife and sons

(tuk), (but) it is made (by the bonds) of (spiritual) knowledge (vidyā), it is

not formed by common ancestry (yonisaṁbandha), for (one who is related

in this way) is a worldly fettered soul. The person for whom the teacher
has a special affection should be worshipped to please him, not for his own

greatness, and his family should be worshipped, as is the teacher. (536cd539) (534-537ab)
‘Thatʼ is the teacher’s family. (The word) ‘tuk’ means ‘son’. ÁAccording

to the lexicon ‘tuk, tokaṁ and tanayaḥ (all mean) ‘son’. That (kind of family
is) ʻformed by common ancestry (yonisaṁbandha)’. The reason to worship
(a person that belongs to the teacher’s spiritual family is that the teacher) ‘has a
special affection’ (for him).

This passage, i.e., 15/538-544ab (534-540ab), focuses on the rules relating to the manner a

disciple should behave with his teacher. Nobody has the authority to make such rules himself.
Clearly, Abhinava is drawing from some scriptural source (Trika or Krama), or possibly putting
material together from several sources. These he has listed at the beginning of his exposition.
Perhaps he is quoting from the 7Triśirobhairava. See below, note 15,846.
U The MV itself furnishes an example of the usage of the word ‘sāmya’ as meaning common
(basic practice). The last statement of chapter eight says: ity etat sāmayaṁ karma samāsāt
parikīrtitam This is the (basic) common (sāmaya) rite that has been well enounced in brief.’
Paraphrase of MV 8/132: “The wise man always (eats) having worshipped the gods, fire,

teachers and goddesses, and does not eat anything that has not been offered to them’.

The ‘substances’ of the god (devadravya) in this case are his clothes, ornaments, jewels etc.,
with which his icons are adorned. See ŚSP vol. 2, p. 272.

See below, 28/194.
Nighaṇṭu 2/2.
Read -bhūmitvam arcane for —bhūmitvam arcana.

TANTRĀLOKA

T īḷ JJT-Ī āITĀTTIJTS] || Ḷyo||
ferītāaī yā̄ata fkfērīta-mcd |

ca īifkī
hṝ āTt ṀT3
r || u? ||

IŪGTEITEĀFPEETCPICEIEEI|[zzafḤ

aqvīq fēē- aā=a-qḶ II ux2 1|

guror nindāṁ na kurvīta tasyai hetuṁ na cācaret |
na ca tāṁ śr̥ṇuyān nainaṁ kopayen nāgrato ʻsya ca || 540 ||
vināãjñayā prakurvīta kiñcit tatsevanād ṛte |
laukikālaukikaṁ kr̥tyaṁ krodhaṁ krīdāṁ tapo japam || 541 ||
gurūpabhuktaṁ yat kiñcic chayyāvastrāsanādikam |
nopabhuñjīta tatpadbhyāṁ na spṛśet kintu vandayet || 542 ||
(The disciple) should not criticise the teacher nor find reason (to do
s0), nor should he listen to that (criticism), neither should he make him

angry. In front of him, apart from serving him, there is nothing he should
do without his permission, be it a worldly or otherworldly deed, (express)

anger, play, (practice) austerity or repeat Mantras. Finally, he should not
make use of anything already used by the teacher, such as his bed, clothes,
seat and the like, nor should he touch them with his feet. Rather he should
worship them. (540-542) (537cd-540ab)
(The disciple should not) ‘find a reason’ to criticise (his) teacher. Nor

should he listen ‘to that’ criticism of (his) teacher. (He should not make) ʻhimʼ,
that is, the teacher (angry). The sense is that (the disciple can) serve him then
without (having to have) ‘his (express) permission’ (to do S0).
Surely (one may ask), how is it that so much emphasis is placed on
worshipping the teacher in this way? With this doubt in mind, he says:
The Pledges according to the Triśirobhairava

TTTSIĨTĀāSTT Jrzgrzraōīfzfiī: |

TṬĀTTTI-TGTĒ HTTTI āTTI fīT || Ḷx% 1|

fk-rarāṝdāṃṁ r̥rartēzī ar aa-. 1 ūx.. 1|
HṀ̄ŪĪTKTTTTCYTATTTT TCṬ |


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


TTGaTTTFTTĪcJUĪ JṬTSGGTTJTATĪ |

fr-ṁ a= aa āaī || yś. l|
Tē] TG īdz’̄d TāāTPRTAÇ TH |
śrīmattraiśīrase ‘py uktaṁ kṛcchracāndrāyaṇādibhiḥ |
araṇye kāṣṭhavat tiṣṭhed asidhārāvrato ‘pi san || 543 II
nīiyamastho yamastho ‘pi tatpadaṁ nāśnute param ḷ|
gurvārādhanasaktas tu manasā karmaṇā girā || 544 |
prāpnoti gurutas tuṣṭāt pūrṇaṁ śreyo mahādbhutam !
himapātair yathā bhūmiś chāditā sā samantataḥ || 545 ||
mārutaśleṣasaṁyogād aśmavat tiṣṭhate sadā |
yamādau niścale tadvad bhāva ekas tu gṛhyate || 546 ||
guros tv ārādhitāt pūrṇaṁ prasarajjñānam āpyate |
sarvato ʻ‘vasthitaṁ cittvaṁ jñeyasthaṁ yasya tatkathā |l 547 |I
sadya eva nayed ūrdhvaṁ tasmād ārādhayed gurum ḷ

“]t is also said in the venerable Traiśirasa: “Even if by observing

the penances (called) kṛcchra, cāndrāyaṇa and the like, (one lives) in a

forest (and is so absorbed in meditation so as to appear to be as inert) as a
4 ] 5/544cd-549 (540cd-545) is certainly drawn from Triśirobhairavatantra. Abhinava says that
‘it is also said’ in the Triśirobhairava (15/544cd (540cd)). This may mean that what has been
stated before (i.e. in 15/538-544cd (534-540ab) is drawn from there and what follows is ‘also
saidʼ there.

These are types of penances that essentially involve long fasts. See Brunner-Lachaux 1985:

410-411. As they are similar in this respect, these two penances ~ kṛcchra and cādrāyaṇa — are
commonly mentioned together. The earliest Saiddhāntika works concerning the rites of reparation
were compendiums (nibandha) made up of extracts from the Siddhāntāgamas. Two have been
published together and both are called Prāyaścittasamuccaya. The earliest which belongs to the
eleventh century or a little earlier is by Hṛdayaśiva, and the other belonging to the twelfth century
by Triḷocanaśiva (see bibliography). The former presents the prescriptions that concern them from
chapter forty-five of the Kiraṇatantra (chapter 15); the chapter on penance in the
Sarvasvacchanda consisting of twelve thousand (15 (34)). (Note that this is not the

Svacchandatantra) and the common, general procedure (sāmānyaprāyaścittavidhāna) called

Agneya in the Vātulatantra (44). They are defined by the twelfth century by Trilocanaśiva in his


Prāyaścittasamuccaya (see bibliography) as follows:


‘For half a month, in the bright (fortnight), one should increase (one's food each day) by
a mouthful (grāsavṛddhī); and in the darkening (fortnight) one should decrease (it by the same
amount). (Thus,) the manner of performing cāndrāyaṇa has been taught. (There is also a) water-

based cāndrāyaṇa, in which one increases and decreases by a mouthful) just of water.”

‘He should eat one meal a day for three days, (then) for three days (only) what is

(offered to him) un-begged, (then) he should eat at night for three days, (and finally) he should
consume (only) air for three days. Thus is the krcchra taught, which is (also) called prajāpatya.”
(778-779ab)

Varieties of these penances (also called ‘vows’ — vrata ibid. 85cd) are described in the

verses that follow up to 82ab. They are prescribed for one who shouts at or strikes his teacher
(134cd-136). The kṛcchra fast is prescribed, for example, for eating from the plate of a
menstruating woman (286cd), as it is for touching someone who has committed grave sins

(mahāpātaka) (273ab 399cd-404), a Brahmin who eats the food of a śūdra (31cd-320), smelling

the scent of liquor (385cd-386ab), stealing black beans (391), and for larger thefts, both (415-

419ab).

TANTRALOKA

piece of wood, even if one is engaged in observing the Vow of the Blade of
the Sword (asidhārā) and is steadfast in the observance of injunctions
4 Chapter 45 of the first ṣaṟka of the JY provides extensive idealized lists of Tantras and lineages
transmitted in monasteries — mathikas, from which they derive their name. A series of vratas are
associated with each one of them. In this way, the names of many vratas are listed, amongst
which we find asidhāra in several instances. The Vow of the Sword Blade suggests that it is a
severe austerity involving cutting oneself with a sword, standing or walking on the blade of a
sword. Judging from the context here, we would expect it to be a penance of this sort. It is listed

amongst a series of fourteen penances in the Svacchandatantra. 10/389cd-390ab and 391-392ab

of JY 1/18/144-145 is a direct, literal citation; see above note 15,807 for a translation. The
Brahmayāmala also lists the names of many vratas and describes the practice of some of them.
There in this ‘Kāpālika Tantra’, rather than penances, they figure more as practices to gain
siddhis, inyolving transgression of Vedic norms of conduct. In this case, it involves the worship of
deity in the body of a beautiful woman as and through substances produced by sexual intercourse.
The sense then of the name asidhāra is in this case probably because the practice is very
dangerous, like walking on the blade of a sword. It is described in chapter forty of the

Brahmayāmala. The text, edited as far as it was possible from the manuscripts, follows:

ataḥ paraṁ pravakṣyāmi asidhāravratam mahān |
sarvasiddhipradaṁ proktaṁ sarvayoginipūjanam || ] |I
pūrvalakṣaṇasaṁyuktāṁ yoṣitāṁ [k: yoṣito] suratocchukām [k: chukām] |
238a k) aṅvarūpasaṁpannāṁ [k: -nnā] nayayauvanadarpitām [k: sava-] ||2 ||
hāsyalāsyavilāśinyā vibhramādividhānakam |
vastrālaṅkārasaṁpannāṁ [k: -lakāra-] sarvābharaṇabhūṣitām | 3 ||
hārakeyūramāṇikyamuktāvalisusaṁsthitām ḷ . . .
pīnonnatastanyepetāṁ sobhāsaparimaṇḍalāḥ || 5 ||
189b kh) cucukāśraddāmasobhā maghanā tu payodharā |
‘Next, I will tell (you) the great Vow of the Blade of a Sword, that is said to beṣtow all
accomplishments (siddhi) and is the worship of all Yoginīs. (One should bring a young) woman
who possesses all (good) characteristics, who is keen (to enjoy) the pleasures of love (rati). She
(should) has an extremely beautiful body and be proud of her new youth, she enjoys the play of
dance and merrymaking that disturbs (and arouses men) etc. She has (fine) clothes and ornaments
and is adorned with all the adormments. (She wears beautiful) necklaces and anklets with emeralds
and pearls . . . (I-4ab) she has fat and upraised breasts and is surrounded by an aura of beauty. Her
breasts flourish and their nipples are large. (Ścd-6ab)
prakṛtyā śīlasaṁpanāṁ vidagdáhā ca vilāsinī [k: -ni] |
rājānaṁ yoṣitām vāpi anyavarṇagatām api |l 7 ||
tādṛgvidhopabhogañ ca [k: -śca] ātmānam [k: ātmanaṁ] samalaṅkaret [k: sasalaṅkaret] |
vāmapārśve sthitā yāntu (> sā tu) vahinyāsantu (> bahir-) kārayet || 8 ||
śarīre hastayor vakṣyaṁ [k: -kṣya] svāyāgasthaṁ [kh: -gotthaṁ] vidhānavit |
strīyāgapūrvakaṁ [k: śṛhayāgapūrvaka, kh: gṛha-] nyāsaṁ tathātmani vikalpayet || 9 ||
cumvanāliṅganā krṛtvā bahirṇyāsantu kārayet |
She is well-mannered by nature, skilful and playful. She may be a royal woman or also
belong to another caste. He should adorn himself with similar adornments. (Seated) on (his) left, he
should deposit (mantras) externally on (his and her) body and hands. The one who knows the

procedure, (seated) in his own place of sacrifice, before performing the sacrifice to the woman, should
fashion a deposition in the same way on himself. Having kissed and embraced (her), he should deposit
(mantras) externally (onto her body). (7-10ab)

śaktipīthe nyāsaṁ kṛtvā āsane sthāpaye tu tām [k: mā] || 10 ||
cumvanāliṅganaṁ kr̥tvā līṁgaṁ tatra vinikṣipet |
nityanaimittikaṁ kāmyaṁ japaṁ [k: jayaṁ] kuryād avagrahe || 1 1 |
nirācārapadāvastho [k: -vasthā] vyomārṇavanisevakaḥ |
pramādād yadi kṣobhaḥ [k, kh: kṣābho] syāt svayamevatsukānitaḥ [k: tu] |I 12 |
japed daśasahasrāṇi tattvayuktiṣṭu sādhakaḥ |


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


---ṀM.—QQQQQ

Having made the deposition on the Śaktipītha, he should place her on a seat. Having
embraced and kissed (her), he should place his Liṅgam there. He should repeat Mantra (as for the)
regular, occasional or optional rite. Established on the plane of nirācāra, he attends on the Ocean
of

the Sky. If (the practitioner is) sexually aroused by mistake. . . the adept who is conjoined with reality
should repeat (mantra) ten thousand times. (10-13ab)

cumvanāliṅganaiś caiva (+ nairñcaiva) śītkāraiḥ savilāsakaiḥ || 1 3 |
paratattvāvalokī ca kṣobho naiva samācaret |
āhnikāṇnāntarālantu [k: agnikā-] kriyā yā prerayed vudhaḥ l 14 |
pūrvoktena vidhānena āhnikāni [k: āgnikāni] tu kārayet |
madhyāhne cāhnikaṁ tatra karttavyaṁ sādhakena [k: koṇa] tu |/ 15 |
tṛtīye sevanaṁ krtvā bhojanaṁ ca samārabheṭ |
He who views supreme reality should not be aroused by the kisses and embraces, the
sounds of lovemaking and amorous play. The wise man engages in the rite without break throughout
the day. He should practice the daily observances in the manner taught before. The adept should
practice the daily observance at midday. Having worshipped (sevanaṁ kṛtvā) in the third (part of the

day), he should take food. (13cd-16ab)

niveditan tu devīnāṁ āmiṣaṁ caiva bhakṣayet | 16 ||
238b) aṇyoṉyamukhadānena bhakṣayet avidhānatā [k: bha yeta-] |
bhakṣaṁ bhakṣayato prājña mukho mukhe na saṁśayaḥ || 17 II
tṛṣitas tu [k: -ntu] pived vāri saucaṁ naiya samācaret |
abhiṣekas [k: abhiṣekaṁ] tathā śaktiṁ bahir niṣkramya dhārayet || 1 8 II
He should eat meat having offered it to the goddesses. He should eat giving (and taking)
mutually (from one) mouth (to the other). The wise man eats food from mouth to mouth without
a
doubt. He who is thirsty should drink water. He should not cleanse (the body) The consecration (takes

place) in that way. Going outside, he should maintain a hold of the (spiritual power he has thus
received). (16cd-18)
nityavrataṁ tu niṣkramya tayā sārddáhaṁ [k: sāddhaṁ] samācaret |
sakhāyai dūrasaṁsthais tu veṣṭitaḥ svāyudhodyataiḥ || 19 ||
dhyānarūpan tathā kr̥tvā devāgāraṁ tato vrajet |
maunī dhyāṇaparo [k: parau] mantrī saktivarjaṁ [k: -varjja] samācaret || 20 ||
tayā saha svapet [k: -yat] mantrī ekatraivāsite bhuvi [k: vibhu] |
anyonyāliṅganair nityaṁ vilāsādibhir veṣṭitaiḥ || 21 |

Having gone forth, he should observe a perpetual vow together with her. He is surrounded

by (his) companions who are at a distance, their weapons raised. Then having fashioned the form
of
the visualized (deity) (dhyānarūpa), he should 20 to the deity’s shrine. The reciter of Mantra, silent

and intent on visualization, should practice with Śakti. The reciter of Mantra should sleep with her,

together in a single place on the ground constantly, with accompanying embraces with one another
and love sports. (19-21)
tāmbūlaṁ bhakṣayen nityam anyonyādānam ācaret |

sanmukhau tu ṣyapen nityaṁ na kadācit parāṅmukhau || 22 |

kṣobhantu [k: -stu] rakṣayen nityaṁ nīrācārapade sthitaḥ |
svayaṁbhũtaṁ [k: ṣvaya bhuto?] japaṁ kuryãd [k: kuryā] daśasāhasrakaṁ vudhaḥ || 23 ||

190a kh) kāmato kṣobham āyāti prāyaścitaṁ samācaret |

ekāhnena maithunena māsena varavarṇini || 24 ||

He should regularly eat betel and practice giving it to one another. They should always
sleep facing one another, never facing away from each other. He should protect (his state of) arousal,
established on the play of nirācāra. The wise man should practice the spontaneous repetition
of

Mantra for ten thousand times. If he is aroused by lust, he should practice penance, O most excellent
lady, by daily sexual intercourse for a month. (22-24)

TANTRĀLOKA

(niyama) and prohibitions (yama), one does not attain that supreme plane.
However, he who is dedicated to worshipping (his) teacher with (his) mind,
actions and speech receives from the teacher who is satisfied (and well
propitiated) the great wonder, which is the supreme good, in full. Just as
the earth, covered all around by (abundant) snowfall, remains constantly
(hard) like a slab of stone by contact with the wind, in the same way, when
(the observance) of pr ohibitions (and injunctions) etc. does not waver, (the

yogi) assumes a single (one-pointed) state (of mind) (bhāva).

(But) it is only from the teacher who has been (well) worshipped

that one attains the full, unfolding (prasarat) knowledge (of Deity), which is
the consciousness present in all respects (within the sphere of) objectivity.
(Just) his talk (kathā) of that elevates (his disciples) immediately. Thus, one
should (above all) worship the teacher.” (543-548ab) (540cd-545)

The Pledges according to the Trikasāra

JTṢTR ā"IHITTT TYAĪTḤ ATITT II AXAZ ÁI

JITHTTTTĪ
āITā T̄T Tg ã-̄ḹ āš I| y8 |

Īeīssīq āaaṁ araīaā āra fē : |

qafa aI: ṀõŪ̄d td N || uyo l|

3 N. 1| uuz 11

J3īd a Tad sāī—IĪfRJHTTGT
TṬē: II 442 1II
3īṝ ãfāīzq īzīat aaāā fafkrarāzq |

Tīaq āṝāTk gi TrãT T ōHHT II uṂ3 ||

asidhāraṁ [k: -naṁ] punaḥ kuryād asidhāravrate vidhau |
māsam ekaṁ caret mantrī ṣaṁyukto [k, kh: saṁyato] dhyānatatparaḥ || 25 ||
māsena khecarās tasya ātmānaṁ darśayanti [k: -yenti] hi |
evaṁ māsantu saṁcārī [k: -ro] yaḥ punaḥ kṣobham ācaret || 26 ||
icchayā darpasāmarthyaṁ punaḥ māsaṁ vrataṁ caret [k: cat |
anena kramayogena avrataghnas tu sādhakaḥ || 27 ||
239a k) rātrau vāpi samet? (> caret) mantrī kṣiptvā liṅgaṁ bhage ‘thavā || 32 ||

He should perform (the practice of) the Sword’s Blade, according to the procedure of the

Vow of the Sword’s Blade. The reciter of Mantra should practice it for a month intent on visualization.
In a month the Skyfarers will show themselves (to him). In this way in a month he moves the same (as
they do). (But) he who in a month again practices (sexual) arousal wilfully, the capacity (that comes
from) pride, he should observe the Vow again for a week. In this way, the adept destroys what is
contrary to the Vow (avrata). . . Or else, the reciter of mantra should practice at night, having placed
(his) Liṅgam in (her) Yoni.” (25-27, 32cd) BY 40/1-4ab, 5cd-6-27, 32cd
TĀ 5/550-557ab (546-553ab).


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


ãzzīTāāīttd aēramz zaz faasīāīq |
JTĩcēāīaīsīṁ Jaē ī āaīTdcdāj-q || uuz 1|
iCEĀSZIEERIES ĀCFAĀĀṀIGtIVTIIEAEḤ
3ṛ-̄zaāḹ fqarṝkaīgag ãvaī; as=grzaiftza: || uuu ||
śrīsāre ʻ‘py asya saṁbhāṣāt pātakaṁ naśyati kṣaṇāt || 548 ||
tasmāt parīkṣya yatnena śāstroktyā jñānalakṣaṇaiḥ |
śāstrācāreṇa varteta tena saṅgaṁ tathā kuru || 549 ||
snehāj jātu vadej jñānaṁ lobhān na hīyate hi saḥ |
tena tuṣṭena trpyanti devāḥ pitara eva ca || 550 ||
uttīrya narakād yānti sadyaḥ śivapuraṁ mahat |
bhuṅkte tiṣṭhed yatra gṛhe vrajec chivapuraṁ tu saḥ l| 551 ||
iti jñātvā sadā pitrye śrāddhe svaṁ gurum arcayet |
bhuñjīta sa svayaṁ cānyānādiśet tatkṛte guruḥ || 552 ||
yo dīkṣitas tu Śśrāddhādau svatantraṁ vidhim ācaret |
tasya tan niṣphalaṁ sarvaṁ samayena ca laṅghyate || 553 ||
saiddhāntikārpitaṁ caṇḍīyogyaṁ dravyaṁ vivarjayet |
śākinīyācakaṁ śabdaṁ na kadācit samuccaret || 554 ||
striyaḥ pūjyā virūpās tu vṛddhāḥ śilpopajīvikāḥ |
antyā vikāritāṅgyaś ca veśyāḥ svacchandaceṣṭitāḥ || 555 ||
(It is) also (said) in the venerable Śāra (i.e., the Trikasāra) that (just)

by conversing (with him), sin is destroyed in a moment. Therefore, examine
(the teacher) as is taught in the scripture with regards to the signs of (his)

knowledge, and (whether) his behaviour conforms to scripture. (Then,

having found him to be true,) keep his company (saṅga) accordingly! (Such

a one) imparts knowledge out of love; he does not fall due to greed.N

When he is satisfied, the gods are satisfied, and the ancestors,

having come forth from hell, go immediately to Śiva’s great abode. (So too,
the ghost,) in whatever house he may reside and suffer the consequence of
Karma (bhuṅkte), goes to Śiva’s abode. Having known this, he should
always worship his own teacher when making an offering to the deceased
(śrāddha). The teacher should eat it himself, and having done so, should tell
others (to do the same). However, the initiate who performs the rite of
offering (food) to the deceased by himself independently, all (he does) is
fruitless, and (moreover) he transgresses the rule.
He should abstain from (wrong notions concerning) the sacrificial

substance fit (for the goddess) Candī, offered in accord with the
prescriptions of the scripture (saiddhāntikārpita). He should never utter a

word that calls (a woman) a witch (śākinī). Women are (always) worthy of

worship, whether they be ugly, old, live from (their) handicraft, belong to a
low caste, their limbs are deformed, or are prostitutes and loose women
(svacchandacesṣṭitā). (548cd-555) (546-553ab)
Read hīyate for hriyate. See below, 15/586cd-588ab.

TANTRĀLḶOKA

The Pledges according to the Gamatantra

āaṃ] Tē Tī ṬGHIAT; JTcd: |
fzārTamī. #ēṝraar̥ rremsfāassīaī. ú1 uuē 1

̄ā ŪṀaāTāçē d JATIST āSSHT |I 449 1|

Tāī TTIRTT: ṬJJHSITT
JāRĀNTĪT : || Ḷu/ 1I
3araī: āftzrāraī āī ā qṬāad 3fēarī] |
āṝā ṁī ūīai Tōa JJIJĨ || 48 11
tathā ca śrīgame proktaṁ pūjanīyāḥ prayatnataḥ |
nirācārāḥ sarvabhakṣyā dharmādharmavivarjitāḥ || 556 ||
svacchandagāḥ palāśinyo laṁpatā devatā iva |
veśyāḥ pūjyās tadgṛhaṁ ca prayāgo ‘tra yajet kramam || 557 ||
strīṣu tan nācaret kiñcid yena tābhyo jugupsate |
ato na nagnās tāḥ paśyen na cāpi prakaṭastanīḥ || 558 |I
vrddhāyāḥ saṁsthitāyā vā na jugupseta mudrikām |
vaikṛtyaṁ tatra saurūpyaṁ melakaṁ na prakāśayet || 5S9 ||
The same (is said) in the venerable Gamatantra: “(Women) should
be venerated (pūjanīya) with (great) effort. Women who have abandoned
conventional behaviour (for a higher one) (nirācārā), eat everything, who
are devoid of (both) Dharma and Adharma, who live freely, who eat meat
and are dissolute (laṁpaṭā), are like deities. Prostitutes should be
venerated, and their home is (like) Prayāga. Here (the initiate) should offer
sacrifice to (the deities of) the tradition (krama). He should abstain from
any action that can lead him to feel disgust for women. Thus, he should not
look at them (when they are) naked or with their breasts exposed. He

should not feel disgust by the deformed appearance (mudrikā) of one who
has the form (saṁsthitā) of an old (woman). There (in that case, physical)
deformity is beautiful. One should not reveal the (location of) the meeting

(place where initiates worship together) (melaka). (556-559) (553cd-

557ab)

gaṝraig gīār-dervīrg fsrṁ: | ykc 1||

ṬST TṬTTHĀITĪĪ TJ JĪRaSĪTT |

devamūrtiṁ śūnyatanuṁ pūjayet tripathādiṣu |
TĀ 15/557cd-566 (551cd-562).
Gnoli translates: ‘one should not show the (secret) conventions (to the uninitiated) (melaka)’.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


sarvaparvasu sāmānyaviśeṣeṣu viśeṣataḥ || 560 |l
pūjā guror anadhyāyo melake lokavarjanam |
One should worship the idol of a deity that is unadorned

(Śūnyatanu) (and abandoned, one happens to find) at a crossing of three

roads, or some (similar place). The worship of the teacher is a break from
study, (and should be performed) especially on all propitious times

(parvan), both common and special. (When attending) (Kaula)
gatherings (melaka), the world (of daily life) (loka) is (to be)
abandoned. (560-561ab) (557cd-558)

ī frxza azq fncā rsṝtvṛaāaṝ |
3dāTa zr ēēā I fafq || uR2 1
fāsrsrafāēcaātraarṁā vaāāaā = |

na jugupseta madyādivīradravyaṁ kadācana || 561 ||
na ninded atha vandeta nityaṁ tajjoṣiṇas tathā |
upadeśāya na doṣā hṛdaye cen na vidviṣet || 562 ||
vijātīyavikalpāṁśatyāgāya prayateta ca |
One should never be revolted by the hero’s sacrificial substances,
such as wine. Nor should one criticise those who delight in them; (rather,)
one should always praise them.®” There are no defects in teaching (others

about them) if one is not (secretly) averse to them in (his) heart. One

should exert oneself to abandon (all) contrary notions (vijātīyavikalpa)
(about them). (Ś61cd-563ab) (559-560)

T: TJIRT] ṜTĪIĪ TIḤ H-ITI aḠ-Ã̄Ã. || u3 ||

īīāa #-ārīqā T ġrú afē || uēz /||
qHVT āfzcgdr rTaī-ā-ā; |

For a definition of parvan, see below 28/372.
This injunction may refer to the worship of the idol, but that is unlikely.

Abhinava describes the state
of consciousness of the siddhas and yoginīs who attend a Kaula
gathering (cakrameḷaka) for an Ādiyāga below in 28/18cd-20ab.
Ṟead with MS Th lokavarjanam — ‘the world is (to be) abandoned’ for lobhavarjanam - ‘greed
is (to be) abandoned..

5 Śivopādhyāya quotes a line in his commentary on the VB (p. 61) that is quite probably the

original Abhinava had before him in the Gamatantra. The first half is the same. It reads: na
ninded atha vandeta vīradravyaparāṉ narān | “Oṉe should not criticize, (rather) one should
always praise, the men who are intent (on making use) of the hero’s sacrificial substances.’

Read hṛdaye for hṛdayaṇṁ.
Read with MS Th: —vikalpāṁśatyāgāya prayateta for -vikalpāṁśotpuṁsanāya yateta, which
makes no sense.

TANTRĀḶOKA

guroḥ śāstrasya devīnāṁ nāma mantro yatas tataḥ || 563 ||
arcāto ‘nyatra noccāryam āhūtaṁ tarpayet tataḥ |
āgatasya ca mantrasya na kuryāt tarpaṇaṁ yadi || 564 |I
haraty ardhaśarīraṁ tad ity ūce bhagavān yataḥ |
The name of the teacher, the scripture, and the goddesses is a
Mantra, and so should not be uttered (at any time) elsewhere apart from
when worshipping, and once invoked, libation should be offered to it. For
the Lord has said' that if libation were not to be offered to a Mantra that
has come (before the worshipper in the place of worship), it steals away half
of (his) body. (563cd-565ab) (561-562)

The Pledges According to the Ūrmikaulārṇava

śrīmadūrmau ca devīnāṁ vīrāṇāṁ ceṣṭitaṁ na vai || 565 ||
prathayen na jugupseta vaden nādravyapāṇikaḥ !
Moreover, (it is said) in the venerable Ūrmi that (an initiate)

should not divulge the behaviour of the goddesses and heroes (engaged in
Kaula ritual), nor feel aversion to it, nor address them without the
sacrificial substances in (his) hands. (Ś65cd-566ab)

d īm aāṁṁz TÑTÑGATṀĒTIT I| UG II

#sar

zraṁ

gāTq || 4G9 I|
śrīpūrvaṁ nāma vaktavyaṁ guror dravyakareṇa ca l| 566 ||
gurvādīnāṁ na laṅghyā ca chāyā na dvaitibhiḥ saha |
jalpaṁ kurvan svaśāstrārthaṁ vaden nāpi ca sūcayet || 567 I
Read mantro for mantre.

TĀ 15/566 (562) is quoted in a note to TSā (on p. 180) immediately following a citation of TĀ

26/51cd-53ab. There is only one variant, but it is very interesting one. Instead of ity ūce bhagavān
yataḥ — ‘for the Lord has said . . ` in the note we read ity uktaṁ kila śambhunā — Śambhu has
said . . . .’. Should we understand Śambhu here to be Śambhunātha? If so by reading 26/51cd53ab along with 566 (562), it is clear that he advocated that the libation be made with Kaula
substances.

” TĀ 15/566 (662) is quoted again below in 26/53cd-54ab and in TĀv ad 29/22cd. No reference
is made in those places to the source. Here it appears to be the end of a citation from the
Gamatantra.
TĀ 15/567-574 (563-570).

This is the Ūrmikaulārṇavatantra. See above, note to 2/48.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


The teacher’s name should (always) be uttered with a preceding

(honorific) ‘śrī’, whilst holding (the sacred Kaula) substances (as an
offering to him). (The disciple) should not cross over the shadow of (his)

teachers and others (like them). While conversing with dualists,®° he should
not talk about the teachings (artha) of his own scriptures or even refer to
them. (566cd-567) (564-565ab)

nītyād viśeṣapūjāṁ ca kuryān naimittike vidhau |
tathāpi madhye varṣasya tathāpi hi pavitrake || 568 I|
He should perform the regular (daily rite) and the special rite of
adoration (pūjā) for (each) prescribed (special) occasion, so too also in the
middle of the year, and indeed also" (in the course of the rite of the

offering of) the sacred thread. (568) (565cd-566ab)

ṝṃēz fē fa=īṁ ā-TmaTaTīq || u£< 11
anyastamantro nāsīta sevyaṁ śāstrāntaraṁ ca no |

aprarūḍhaṁ hi vijñānaṁ kamped etarabhāvanāt || 569 ||
He on whom Mantra has not been deposited should not sit (to take
part in the rites). Nor should he resort to other scriptures. Knowledge
which is not fully developed may vacillate® by reflecting (bhāvana) on

(scriptures) other (than one’s own). (569) (566cd 567ab)

TGTTG-TVĪṬGIT] ṜṬHTATATT; |
srṝaāTtfṁd 7 va+aī ā gvīāt̄d fssāq || usc 1|
grhopaskaraṇāstrāṇi devatāyāgayogataḥ |
arcyānīti na padbhyāṁ vai spṛśen nāpi vilaṅghayet || 570 ||
Household utensils and weapons are used for the sacrifice to the
deities and so should be worshipped. They should not be touched with the

feet, nor should one step over them. (570) (567cd-568ab)

Read with MSs Th and T dvaitibhiḥ for tairthikaiḥ — ‘with piḷgrims’. The original reading may

also be tarkikaiḥ — ‘with logicians’.
Emend nityād to nityāṁ.
“ Emend tato ‘pi madhye to tathāpi madhye and tato ‘pi hi to tathāpi hi.
Correct kampet etara- to kamped etara-.

TĀ 15/570cd-571ab (566cd-567ab) is quoted above in TĀv ad 4/261cd-263ab.
T Çf. KM 25/113-114ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

ēīfaṛarī f--=rt: āaīz fāṣrṝdēū 11| y.g 11
3U-VTT -T āī: T ̄Tūgīīgē |
ī adTvṛatēāṁrīa-rgft=fṝ. ḍaāaa1 1| 4oṜ 1|
TṬGṬĪSTYTṀĀTINII JāĀfcēifsī] |

guruvarge gṛhāyāte viśeṣaṁ kañcid ācaret |
dīkṣitānāṁ na nindādi kuryād vidveṣapūrvakam || 571 II
upadeśāya no doṣaḥ sa hy avidveṣapūrvakaḥ |
na vaiṣṇavādikādhaḥsthadṛṣṭibhiḥ saṁvased alam || 572 ||
sahabhojanaśayyādyair naiṣāṁ prakaṭayet sthitim |
He should perform some special (ceremony) when the members of
the teacher’s family visit one’s home. One should not criticise or the like
initiates with (feelings of) aversion. There is no defect in teaching (others).
That is not attended by (feelings of) aversion.”™" One should not live

together with followers of inferior doctrines, such as Vaiṣṇavas,” nor

should one tell others that one eats or sleeps with them.® (571-573ab)
(568cd-570)

The Pledges according to the Mādhavakula

3ṝ H-īdēāqŪ JIHT-RTRJTT] II 4.93 1|

ṁ aicãaṝ |

uktaṁ śrīṁmmādhavakule śāsanāntarasaṁsthitān || 573 ||
vedoktiṁ vaiṣṇavoktiṁ ca tair uktaṁ varjayet ṣadā |

”ft is said in the venerable MādhavakulaT that those who are

established in other doctrines, what is taught in the Veda and by Vaiṣṇavas
and what they say, should always be avoided. (573cd-574ab)
vardhamānī-m-upālambhī dehalyā muṣalaṁ tathā |
khaṭvā śūrpagharaṭṭaṁ ca vardhamānyāditaḥ kramāt ||
pādenaitān na saṁspṛśya yad icchec chriyam ātmanaḥ |
‘One should not touch the following things with one’s feet if one wishes good fortune
for oneself: a platter, upālambhī (?), the threshold, a pestle, a bedpost, a winnowing fan, and a
grindstone.’
Cf. JY ṣatka 1 chapter 48, where such household objects are projected into the body, marking
stations of ascent. KM 25/124 ff. supplies inner equivalents of weapons.

Above in 15/564a (560a), instead of the reading upadeśāya na doṣaḥ we find upadeśāya na

doṣāṭ(h) — ‘there are no defects in teaching (others).”
Read vaiṣṇavādikādhaḥ- for vaṣṇavādikādhaḥ-.
Ś Évidence that Abhinava is quoting literally is the terse, bordering on, defective Sanskrit of
these passages.

15/575cd-577ab (571cd-573ab) is drawn from the Mādhavakula.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


(When one practices (the observance) of the prohibitions (and
iṇjunctions) etc. without wavering,) ‘one assumes a single (one-pointed) state
(of mind)ʼ, because one is careful (and attentive to that,) and so is unwavering.
This is the meaning. As (the teacher’s) knowledge expands by nature, it is ‘the
principle of consciousness in all respects present (throughout the sphere of)
objectivityʼ. Such is the case not only by (the teacher’s) teaching, but also
‘(just) by conversing (with him)ʼ, and so he says that ‘his talk (kathā)’
(elevates his disciples immediately). ‘There’, in the case of the (physical)
appearance (mudrikā) (of an old woman, deformity is beautiful). ‘Those who

delight in them’, that is, those who are devoted to the sacrificial substances of a
(Kaula) hero. (There is no harm) ʻ‘in teaching (others)’, for example, ‘what is

wine and what is devotion to Śiva.’ Here (in this case), the fruit (of instruction)
is just to satisfy the mental disposition of the one who is being taught. The sense
of (saying), ‘in the middle of the yearʼ, is whenever there may happen to be
requisites for the rite (samāgrī). (One should not resort) ‘to other scriptures’

that are in conflict with one’s own scriptures. ‘Household utensils’, such as the

stove. (One should not follow what) ‘they’ (say), that is, those who adhere to
the Vedas etc.
The reason here (for this is explained next).

ATJELḤ TTAĀĪTĀJĪCTTĪ-KTÑ ||ḹ ÁMS̄ 1I|

UTāṬĪī ṭJTHI āJTTIĪ-TTTSĪAT |
JHTCṬT=T d TGR TIRATĪ TS Ṭ ṬÑJT II VSṂ (I

akulīneṣu saṁparkāt tatkulāt patanād bhayam || 574 ||
ekapātre kulāmnāye tasmāt tān parivarjayet |
pramādāc ca kṛte sakhye goṣṭhyāṁ cakraṁ tu pūjayet || 575 I|
TBy contact with those who do not belong to (the same) Kula, there
is fear of a fall from that (which is one’s) Kula. A Kula tradition is exclusive
aartāhhctaack-Ḷ-aakvvivahaṀÃ--haāhnmāhhhaaa-v-v--vcaṂṀẼBmmBrtaaheTtmRhPhhāāhaaāāzai.
See below, 29/56.
TĀ 15/575cd is derived from JY 4/20/98cd (MS K 141a Kh 121a, MS G 173a), which reads:

vedoktaṁ vaiṣṇavoktaṁ vā udakaṁ varjayet sadā ||
ŠT TĀ 15/576abc (572abc) is JY 4/20/140abc (MS K: fl 142b, Kh: 123a G: 175b). The text
continues:
akulīnaiś ca saṁparkāt tatkulāt patanaṁ bhavet || 140 ||
ekapātre kulāmnāye kāryaṁ nānyat kadācana |
yadīcched ātmanaḥ śreyo [k,kh: śreyeḥ] siddhir vā vīravandite || 141 ||
jīvitaṁ suciraṁ vātha yoginyo melakaś ca vā |
atītānāgataṁ yogaṁ bhāvanā bhāvanāśanī || 142 ||
taiḥ sārddhaṁ bhojanaṁ varjyaṁ pānagoṣṭhī ca yatnataḥ |
teṣu saṁbhāṣaṇaṁ varjyaṁ saṁsparśaṁ kiṁ punaḥ priye || 143 ||
adīkṣitajanasparśāt snānam āgneyam ācaret |
‘By contact with those who do not belong to (the same) Kula, there is a fall from that
Kula. In a Kula tradition that is exclusive (ekapātra), one should never do otherwise, if one wishes

the best for oneself or accomplishment, O lady praised by (Kaula) heroes, (if one wishes) a long

life or meetings with Yoginīs, Yoga that has passed or not yet come, and the contemplation

TANTRĀLOKA

(ekapātra), and so one must avoid those (who belong to other ones).”

However, if by mistake one has made friends" (with a member of another

tradition, and takes) part in (his) gathering (goṣṭhi), one should worship the
assembly (cakra) (of deities and initiates there along with them). (574cd575) (572-573ab)

FitciEḷṬETEIUGITGEAI

EiRGKGĀcrczik'CAIRCAĒ

śrīmadūrmau ca kathitam āgamāntarasevake ḷ
gurvantararate mūḍhe devadravyopajīvake || 576 ||
Śśaktihiṁsākare duṣte saṁparkaṁ naiva kārayet |

It is also said in the venerable Ūrmi that (an initiate) should not

associate with one who follows other scriptures, one who is devoted to a

different teacher (of another tradition), a fool, one who earns a living with
the substances (that are offered to the) deity, one who is violent to a Tantric
consort (śaktihiṁsā), and one who is wicked. (576-577ab) (573cd-574)

(bhāvanā) that destroys phenomenal existence. One must strenuously avoid drinking together with

them. Conversation with them must be avoided, what to say, O beloved, of touching! The touch of

one who is not intiated requires that one must bath 1n fire.

The term ekapātra- literally means ‘the same plate’. In common usage the term denotes the

condition of the members of a group who dine only amongst themselves 1n order to avoid being
polluted by dining with others. Either way the general sense 1s ‘exclusive’. Kulas are exclusive.
Only members of the same Kula can, for example, study scripture or perform rituals together.

Indeed, they cannot cven eat together. Cf. Kulārmavatantra:

ekapātraṁ na kurvĩta yadi sākṣāt kuleśvaraḥ |

mantrāḥ parāṅmukhā yānn vtghnaścaiva pade pade |
‘One should not eat together (indiscriminately with others) (ekapātra), if one is
Kuleśvara (Himself) directly visible. Mantras become averse and an obstacle (arises) at each step.”
Kulārnava 8/15.
The same verse is found in KuKh 37/67. See Dyczkowski 2009: vol. 11 p. 348-351 note

157 concerning commensality.

15/576 (572) is a quotation from JY 4/20/140cd-141ab (MS K 142b Kh fl. 123a G 175b),
which reads as follows:
akulīnaiś ca saṅparkāt [k kh saṁparkā] tatkulāt patanaṁ bhavet || 140 l|

ekapātre kulāmnāye kāryaṁ nānyat kadācana |

Read with the JY akulīnaś ca for akulīneṣu and bhavet for bhayam.

ṂḶS Th reads saṅge - ‘contact for sakhye — ‘thendsh1p.

l See below, 28/23cd-25ab, 383cd-385ab. The word cakra here may mean the manḍala

worshipped by the assembly of initiates, or the gathering itself, in which the members, male and
female, are embodiments of deities seated around the teacher and his consort.
This is the Ūrmikaulārṇavatantra (see above, note to 2/48). TĀ 15/577cd- 594ab (588cd590ab) is drawn from that.
Instead of dusṭe — ‘wicked’, MSs C and Th read dviṣṭe — ‘dsliked.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


ā f-R aī̄ JāSTTTTTTTRĀT 1I 49 I
sckraaṁēṭāā aāhr r--ī- 1
ITRTHIIJTṬSĪTTTṬ ] TYVTTRĪTĀĪq I| yo¢ 11

na vikalpena dīkṣādau vrajed āyatanādikam || 577 ||
uktāsthāśithilatve yan nimittaṁ naiva tac caret |
Śśāsanasthān purājātyā na paśyen nāpy udīrayet || 578 II
na ca vyavaharet sarvāñ chivābhedena kevalam |
One should not (take) initiation and the like and go to sacred sites
(āyatana) with (fickle) thoughts (vikalpa); nor should one seek to find a

reason for (one’s own) laxity in practicing the stated (teaching). One

should not see, refer to,° or treat those who are established followers of the

teachings according to their prior caste status. (Rather, one should treat

them) all only as one with Siva. (577cd-579ab) (575-576)

(One must avoid) ‘those’ who belong (to other traditions,) such as the
Veda. (One should not take initiation) with ‘(vacillating) thoughts (vikalpa)ʼ,
that is, doubts. One should ‘go’ (to sacred sites) with a mind free of doubts, in
the manner that will be explained. This is the intended sense. (One should not
refer to an initiate’s) ‘prior caste status’ as a Brahmin etc. (Rather) one should

see him ‘as one with SŚiva’. As is said (in the Śvacchandatantra):

‘O goddess, a person who mentions (an initiate’s) prior caste (status is a
sinner who is) subject to penance. He burns for three days in Rudra’s hell, five

in Keśava’s, and a lunar fortnight in that of Brahmā.’

(goddess)

praised

by

heroes,

Brahmins,

warriors

(kṣatriya),

merchants (vaiśya) and servants (śūdra) who have been appointed as teachers

are all considered to be Śivas.

sīáīz āt 11 u92 1

; f.

ārīTrTTHĪ STTdT TT TT fk 1| u¢o 1

Instead of uktāsthā- MS C reads uktyāsthā- and Th: bhaktāsthā- (> bhaktyāṣthā — abiding 1mn
devotion’). The sense here is not just that one should not seek to justify one's own laxity. The

pointis also that, even if one is not fully dedicated to the practice of the teachings, it is better to do

what little one manages to do or has enough faith to do, than waste even more time and effort in
searching for reasons for one’s own laxity.

For nāpy udīrayet MS T reads: na tad īrayet.
ṢVṬ 4/544cd-545.
Ibid. 4/413cd-414ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

sadvidyaiḥ sākam āsīta jñānadīptyai yateta ca || 579 ||
nāsaṁskṛtāṁ vrajet tajjaṁ viphalatvaṁ na cānayet |
melakārdhaniśācaryā janavarjaṁ ca tatra hi l| 580 II
māṁsādidāhagandhaṁ ca jighred devīpriyo hy asau |
One should keep the company (āsīta) of those who have true
knowledge, and exert oneself with those who are enthused by knowledge.
One should not approach (a woman) who has not been purified (asaṅskṛtā).
Moreover, (if one does,) one should not render fruitless what is born from

that (encounter).®”" There,™ where the practice at midnight
(ardhaniśācaryā) of the assembly (of male and female initiates) (melaka)”
takes place, should be (a secluded place where) there are no people

(janavarja). One should smell the aroma of burning meat etc. (One who
does s0) is pleasing to the goddess. (79cd-581ab) (77-578)

‘One should not approach’ and keep the company (of a woman) ‘who
has not been purifiedʼ, that is, who has not received initiation. ‘What is born
from that (encounter) is the mixture of sexual fluids (kuṇḍagola) and the like
(that serve as Kaula sacrificial substances).

[EEUIRER-CĀCEEEF-E IEETĀIṬHZI

ITHṬGTSTTPT-ĪRTTĒTGTTaT; |
rāz̄dfrr-īa īaz fšfaī fōaīa] 1| u¢3 1

gurvājñāṁ pālayan sarvaṁ tyajen mantramayo bhavet || 581 I|
śāstrapūjājapadhyānavivekatadupakriyāḥ |
akurvan niṣphalāṁ naiva ceṣṭeta trividhāṁ kriyām || 582 ||
mantratantrair na vādaṁ ca kuryān no bhakṣayed viṣam |
Observing the teacher’s command, he should abandon everything,
and be one with Mantra (mantramaya) (by being fully concentrated on it).
He should not dedicate himself fruitlessly to the three types of rites
(obligatory, occasional and optional) without (worshipping) the scriptures,
worshipping (the deities), repeating Mantra, meditation, discrimination,
and (whatever) aids them. One should not kill (others) with Mantras and
magical rites (mantratantra), and not feed (others) poison. (Ś81cd-583ab)

(579-580)

Ṭhe lieral meaning of āsita 'one should sit (with), i.c., keep the company of°
]ṇ place of cānayet MS Th reads: cācaret.
See commentary and below, 29/14-16, 22-24ab
! Read tatra for tanna.

2 Cakramelaka is described below in 28/371 ff.

Ṁ Perhaps read hādhaṁ for vādaṁ?


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------

(Observing

the

teacher’s

command,)

‘one

should

abandon

everythingʼ; in this way, for example, his command is obeyed. This is the

sense.

gdTāṝ? fdlī

TE ṬRJGATIĪ || 4¢3 |1

kPẼRIIAẼFFEIPKEEEIEaASEIE-HḤI

ftra ā ṃīaā arṁaī fitr-aTTT 11 uc. 11

samayānāṁ vilope ca guruṁ pṛcched asannidhau || 583 |I
tadvargaṁ nijasantānam anyaṁ tasyāpy asaṁnidhau |
tenoktam anutiṣṭhec ca nirvikalpaṁ prayatnataḥ || 584 ||
yataḥ śāstrādisaṁbodhatanmayīkṛtamānasaḥ |
šiva eva gurur nāsya vāgasatyā viniḥsaret || 585 ||
śivasya svātmasaṁskṛtyai prahvībhāvo guroḥ punaḥ |
hlādāyety ubhayārthāya tattuṣṭiḥ phaladā śiśoḥ || 586 1|
If (someone) transgresses the rules, he should ask the teacher (what

should be done). Or, if (the teacher) is absent, (he should ask) one of his
(same) kind (varga) who is a member of his own spiritual family, or if he

too is not present, another (teacher). He should take care to follow what he
says without thinking (about it) (nirvikalpa). This is because by virtue of

(his) insight (saṁbodha) (into the meaning of) scripture etc., the mind of the

teacher has been made one with it and he is Śiva himself, nor can a false

word come from him. The purpose of bowing (prahvībhāva) before Siva is
to purify oneself. In the case of the teacher, it is to please (him), and so it
serves both purposes. (It is the teacher’s) satisfaction that gives (good)
fruits to the disciple. (583cd-586) (581-584ab)
(If someone transgresses the rules,) ‘he should ask’ (the teacher what)
the penance (should be). (If his own teacher is absent, he should ask) ‘another’

teacher (or a member of) ‘his’ (that is, the teacher’s) ‘own spiritual family’.
(He should follow what) ‘he’, that is, the other one, (says). If one offers
salutation to Siva, it makes no difference at all to Siva. Rather, (it makes a
difference) to the one who offers it. The same is the case with the teacher with
regards to one’s own purification. (But apart from that,) he is also pleased then,
and so it is said that ‘it serves both purposesʼ.

aā TṬĀT_II uc. 11

TANTRĀLOKA

Taē- JS< T̄ . 1 .. 1|
gurvāyattaikasiddáhir hi samayy api vibodhabhāk |
tadbodhabahumānena vidyād gurutamaṁ gurum || 587 I|
ataḥ saṁprāpya vijñānaṁ yo gurau bahumānavān |
nāsau vijñānaviśvasto nāsaktaṁ bhraṣṭa eva saḥ || 588 II

When the ‘regular” initiate, whose success depends solely on the

teacher, also possesses a fully awakened consciousness (vibodha), he
should consider (his) teacher to be (even) more than a teacher (gurutama),

by virtue of the respect (he has) for that awakened consciousness. Thus, one
who, after he has attained knowledge (vijñāna), (yet) does not have great

veneration for his teacher, has no faith in the knowledge (he has

received). He is not zealous.™ (Indeed) he is just a fallen soul. (587-588)

(584cd-586ab)

JTITTHTTrīT Ġ arāTHTITI JITTTT |

EiJḤEK EPE I5{I REIETAAEZ- ĀIIHVĀI

TGTṬGĪ ī TāTYĀÑITITĒTT-HĀĀ |I ḶRe 1I
jñānānāśvastacittaṁ taṁ vacomātreṇa śāstrajñam |
uktaṁ ca nārcayej jātu hṛdā vijñānadūṣakam || 589 ||
tādṛk ca na guruḥ kāryas taṁ kṛtvāpi parityajet |
mukhyabuddhyā na saṁpaśyed vaiṣṇavādigatān gurūn || 590 ||
(A teacher who) does not have faith in the knowledge (of the

scriptures), and is said” to know the scriptures only by (their) words

(without knowing the reality they teach), and with (his) heart criticises

(this) knowledge,” should certainly not be venerated. One should not make
such a teacher (one’s own, or) if one has done so, abandon him. One should

not consider Vaiṣṇava and other such teachers to be the main ones (as one
does true Śaiva teachers). (559-590) (586cd-588ab)

(One should not take a Vaiṣṇava as a teacher;) ‘if one has done so’ by
mistake, (abandon him).

ṂSs C, Ṭ and Th read vúbhodavān.

Read with MS Th bahumānavān for bāhyamānavān.
% R̥ead nāsaktaṁ for nāsatyat.

Ṟead with MSs C and T, uktaṁ for bhaktaṁ.

Read sāstrajīam for śāstritam, which makes no sense.

Instead of hrdā vijñāna- C Th read: hrdādijñāna- “(crīticizes) the knowledge of the Heart and
other (Mantras).


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


ī fāēhczāī 11| u<2 11

iIIE’-IEĀECEIEĀEAIKGEṬ
āaTī TTTI āṬ- TIIJTITI; 11 UR2 1

tathā ca śrīmadūrmyākhye guror uktaṁ viśeṣaṇam |
gurvājñā prāṇasaṁdehe nopekṣyā no vikalpyate || 591 II
kauladīkṣā kaulaśāstraṁ tattvajñānaṁ prakāśitam |

yenāsau gurur ity ukto hy anye vai nāmadhāriṇaḥ || 592||
Moreover, the (distinguishing) characteristic of a teacher is stated
in the venerable (Tantra) called Ūrmi” in the same way. (There it is said
that) out of fear for (one’s) life (if one does so0), the teacher’s command
should not be disregarded (nor) doubted.”” He is said to be a (a real and
true) teacher who reveals Kaula initiation, the Kaula scriptures and
knowledge of reality. Others (just) bear that name. (591-592) (588cd-590ab)

The Pledges According to the Ānandaśāstra

TāTTIIĪ TTJIÑ T TṬG. | Ḷ ||
iezzeeiāīceezlEṈE-ĀRIŪTĀG ĒT

fsṣrfī: at ltrcādrērāīz-] 1| u< 1

faēvaṁ̃: |

śrīmadānandaśāstre ca tathaivoktaṁ viśeṣaṇam |
yasmād dīkṣā mantraśāstraṁ tattvajñānaṁ sa vai guruḥ || 593 II
tiṣṭhed avyaktaliṅgaś ca na liṅgaṁ dhārayet kvacit |
na liṅgibhiḥ samaṁ kaiścit kuryãd ãcãramelanam || 594 ||
kevalaṁ liṅginaḥ pālyā na bībhatsyā virūpakāḥ |
The distinguishing characteristic (of a teacher) is also explained in

the same way in the venerable Ānandaśāstra, (where we read that) a (true)

teacher is one from whom (one obtains true) initiation, the Mantra

scriptures, and knowledge of reality.”

“ Thiṣ is the Ūrmikaulārṇavatantra. See above, note to 2/48.

“ For no vikalpyate MS C: no vúaṅghyate; T: no viiṅghyate — ‘is not to be traṅsgressed.

“2 Abhinava has just quoted the Ūrmikaulārṇava as sayng that the teacher of that Tantra gives

Kaula initiation, Kaula scriptures and knowledge of realiy. One wonders i the replacement of the
first two with simply ‘imtiaton; and ‘scriptures’ 1s sgntficant. We know from the fragments that
have been recovered of the Ūrmḍkaulārṇava that it was a Krama Tantra brought into the world by

Matsyendranāṭha. He 1s a well-known founder figure of Kaulism in general, and so there is no
question of the Ūrmikaulārṇava not being Kaula. Perhaps we may nnfer that although the

Ánandatantra was a Tantra of the left (vāmatantra), 1t was not Kaula.

TANTRĀLOKA

%\Oṉe should (always) be (tiṣṭhet) without (outer) manifest sectarian
signs. Nowhere (in any circumstance) should one bear (outer) signs (of

one’s spiritual affiliation). Nor should one congregate together to practice

(ācāramelana) with those who do (bear such outer) signs. One should only

defend (and respect) those who bear (these) signs (nothing more). One
should not fear (bībhatsyā) people who are deformed (and ugly). (593-596)
(590cd-592)

(The teacher’s word) ‘should not be doubted’, (as when one thinks)
should (what he says) be done or not?”

Rules and Norms Taught in Various Trika
and Bhairava Tantras

gīrzīTṁaz a ūīaī: JTgITRITT: II uRQ4 1]
śrīmadrātrikule coktaṁ mokṣaḥ śaṅkāpahānitaḥ || 595 |
aśuddhavāsanasyaiṣā mokṣavārtāpi durlabhā |
It is said in the venerable Rātrikula: “(The chance of achieving)
liberation is destroyed”® by doubts; for one whose latent tendencies are

impure, even (just) this talk of liberation is hard to obtain (durlabhā).
(595cd-596ab)

% The following three lines seem to be out of place. Reading the text in continuity, the series of
injunctions would apply to the teacher. But that is not likely. The last two are certainly not meant
just for the teacher, the others also do not appear to be. In short, the subject has changed abruptly
to Abhinava citing general rules initiates must observe. So either these lines are spurious, or some
part of the text has been lost. Given this hiatus, it is unsure whether Abhinava continues to draw
from the same source.
The word for ‘sign’ here is ‘liṅga’. It is possible that the reference here is to Śaivites who wear
small liṅgas on their bodies. But it here it is probably not so. Cf.:
avyaktaliṅginaṁ [k: -taṁ] dṛṣṭvā saṁbhāsanti marīcayaḥ |
liṅginaṁ nopasarpanti atiguptāya tat [k: ta] priye [k: priyet] |l
‘(The yoginīs who are) the rays (of the energies of the deity), seeing (an ascetic) without
(outer) manifest insignia, converse (with him). O beloved, they do not approach one who bears
insignia, for they are very secret.' Kulapañcaśika 3/19
Quoted by Kṣemarāja in commentary on the Śivasūtra 3/26 (also quoted in footnote
here). Cf. below 27/17a, also MV 18/1-56ab with regards to the adept who is ‘avyaktaliṅgin’.

“ Abhinava is probably referring here to cakramelana, in which assemblies of Siddhas and

Yoginīs meet to engage in Kaula practice (see below, 28/371 ff).
% Instead of śaṅkāpahānitaḥ MS C reads: śaṅkāprahāritaḥ;, Ṭ; śaṅkāprahānitaḥ.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


Kularatnamālā

Tīcīçgīṁi 7 ] d fhēais 1|

na likhen mantrahṛdayaṁ śr̥īmanmāloditaṁ kala || 596 ||

tadaṅgād uddharen mantraṁ na tu lekhe vilēkhayet |

One should not write the (seed syllable) taught in the venerable

Mālā (i.e., Kularatnamālā), which is the Heart of (all) Mantras.™ (It is said
there that) ‘the Mantra should be extracted from its body.” It should not
be written in a manuscript (lekha).’ (596cd-597ab)
Kulagahvaratantra

aāīT-ũrṁa ú| uQ. ||

ḷ ÃẼẼIĒAJGIISKCKUI ṀSĪTT] |

TIFITaTR} īFATÑ TGTGRTĪTT IIḶA¢ 11
atattve ‘bhiniveśaṁ ca na kuryāt pakṣapātataḥ || 597 ||
jātividyākulācāradehadeśaguṇārthajāṇ |
grahān grahān ivāṣṭau drāk tyajed gahvaradarśitān || 598 I
One should not be attached to what is not true (atattva) (moved) by
(some foolish) prejudice (pakṣapāta). The eight tenacious errors (graha)

"" The Kularamamālā īs a Tnka Tantr. Thus, moṣt probably the Mantrahrdaya is SĀUḤ.
Abhinava refers to it that way 1n PTv p. 252.
The body (aiga) of Mantras 1s a diagram or grid called a prastāra, withīn which the leters of
the alphabet (mātrkā) are deposited. When it been propery consecrated, 1 becomes an ‘assembly
of letters” (mātṛkācakra). Thuṣ empowered, the letters are extracted from 1t to form Mantras.
It
can also serve as a code. Instead of mentoning a letter directly, the text may identfy it by
referring to its positton 1n relation to other letters in the grid. See Schoterman 1982: 181-209 for

an extenstve discussion and presentation, including drawings of several prastāras (also called
gahvaras), and Dyczkowski 2009: vol. 7 pp. 9-11, 13-16 notes 1, 4 and 5.
?” The word graha 1s a noun dernved from the root grh, which has the sense of ‘lay hold of,
catchʼ. Here the same word is used in two senses One ! translate as ‘tenacious error°. These are
the things we ‘hold on t0’ and -lay hold of as seemingly important due to ignorance and
attachment. The word 1s repeated in a second sense, which is defined in Monier-Willams’
dictonary as partcular evil demons or sprits who seize or exerise a bad influence on the body
and mind of a man (causing insanity etc., it fals within the domamn of medical science to expel
theṣe demons, those who especially seize children and cause convulsions etc. are divided into nine
classes according to the number of planets). Indeed, the word ‘graha’ may also means ‘planet’
because planets ‘lay hold’ of people, thus influencing their destiny. Again, a ‘graha’ is also,
according to Moner Willams, ‘any state which proceeds from magical 1nfluences and takes
possession of the whole man’. An interesting example mentioned in the medical books is
rudragṛaha. A person afflited by this graha is possessed by the notion that he is as mighty and
important as Rudra. He is gripped by a fury that makes him very strong and unmindful of the
normal social reṣraints. Thus, he may run through the streets naked yelling at the top of his voice
‘I amṃ Rudra”. This is a state of possession - graha - which is quite different from the grace <

TANTRĀLOKA

explained in the Gahvara should be quickly abandoned as if they were

demons (graha) (that take possession of people). (These are the
attachments) induced by (pride of ones) caste, education (vidyā), (one’s)
family, (one’s) behaviour, the body, country (of origin), (one’s) qualities

and wealth.”" (597cd-598) (595-596ab)

Niśisaṁcāratantra

JTaTTĪSG TAṬ TGṬIRĪTRT #RTT I| 483 ||

l| Goo

[|

tathā śrīniśicārādau heyatvenopadarśitān |
brāhmaṇo ‘haṁ mayā vedaśāstroktād aparaṁ katham || 599 ||
anuṣṭheyam ayaṁ jātigrahaḥ paranīrodhakaḥ |
evam anye ‘py udāhāryāḥ kulagahvaravartmanā || 600 ||
Similarly, in the venerable Niśicāra and elsewhere, they are
presented as what should be rejected. The supreme obstacle (to liberation)

is this (demonic) attachment to caste (jātigraha) (which expresses itself in

the notion that): “I am a Brahmin, so how can I dedicate myself to

something other than that taught in the Vedic scriptures?” (599-600ab)

(596cd-597)
In the same way, other (errors) can be exemplified in relation to the
path (taught in the) Kulḹagahvara. (600cd) (Ś98ab)

Surely (one may ask), how is it that caste (status) is described as being
an eṛṟor?

-rkTrašlāā:

atatsyabhāve tādrūpyaṁ darśayann avaśe ‘pi yaḥ |
svarūpācchādakaḥ so ʻtra graho graha ivoditaḥ || 601 ||

anugraha of the Deity that also manifests as a ‘descent of power’ that penetrates and ‘possesses’

the person who is its object. The difference, of course, is that it enlightens and liberates, whereas
the former obscures and binds. Finally, more simply and directly, one could translate ‘graha’ as
‘attachment’, as in the expression ‘jātigraha — ‘attachment to casteʼ.

! This is the Kulagahvaratantra. The printed edition reads gahvararśitān, which is obviously
wrong. MS C reads: gahvaracarcitān and T, Th gahvaradarśitān, which is the accepted reading.

! AII these errors apply equally as possible causes of pride to people in the West and elsewhere

in the world. In India these all take second place. Pride of one’s own high caste status is the first
and most powerful and tenacious error.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


A tenacious error (graha) is that which, causing one to perceive,
even if involuntarily, something that is of a certain nature as not being of
that nature, obscures its own (true) nature. (Thus) it is said to be like a
demon (graha) (that takes possession of people). (601) (598cd-599ab)
He (goes on to) amplifies this (statement).

āfṭcaarṛa īī sīfcvryfaā: ēft sēcaī 1
T T] TāTaēú]
āg 3IRJTHGH I| 0R 1|

gqgr--ātĩ

saṁvitsvabhãve no jātiprabhṛtiḥ kāpī kalpanā |
rūpaṁ sā tv asvarūpeṇa tad rūpaṁ chādayaty alam || 602 |I
yā kācit kalpanā saṁvittattvasyākhaṇḍitātmanaḥ |
saṅkocakāriṇī sarvaḥ sa grahas tāṁ parityajet || 603 |
No notion (kalpanā) of caste and the like apply to the essential

nature of consciousness. As it is not the true nature of (its) nature,” it is

capable of obscuring that nature. Any (discursive, dualistic) notion of the
(true) nature of consciousness, which (is one and) undivided, contracts it.

All that is erroneous (graha), (and so any such notion) should be
abandoned. (602-603) (599cd-601ab)

aaī ā #'ī, || koz ||

fgāīcast. aa īaī d-dīstī
sāzaā 1| o 11

gqdzṁa: āīā: ūaīatṁ TḤ || o5 ||
śrīmadānandaśāstre ca kathitaṁ parameṣṭhinā |
nirapekṣaḥ prabhur vāmo na śuddhyā tatra kāraṇam || 604 |
devītrptir makhe raktamāṁsair no śaucayojanāt |
dvijāntyajaiḥ samaṁ kāryā carvante ‘pi marīcayaḥ || 605 |I
avikārakṛtas tena vikalpān nirayo bhavet |
sarvadevamayaḥ kāyaḥ sarvaprāṇiṣv iti sphuṭam |l 606 II
! Emend rūpaṁ sā to rūpasya.

TANTRĀLOKA

The Lord has also said in the venerable Ānandaśāstra: ‘The Lord is
without bias (nirapekṣa) and acts in a manner contrary (to the common
worldly norms)” (vāma). The cause there (of his bestowal of grace) is not

the purity (of the recipient).”"“ (Similarly,) the goddesses are satisfied in
(this) sacrifice by bloody meat,”” not by applying (the rules concerning)
purity. Brahmins and those belonging to the lowest castes should be made

equal.”" (Thus) the rays (marīci) (of consciousness radiating through the
senses), although savouring (their objects),” are freed of agitation

(avikārakṛta). Hell is the result of (dualistic) thought. It is clear that the

body of all living beings (irrespective of caste or other conceived
differences) is made of all the gods.” (604-606) (601cd-604ab)
Nakuleśa
|FeEAKIḤIRVṭIṢIĒEEAĒI
.2

JĨTTATJTĪ TTRĀGṬTGT JSIT. I| Ś. ||

śrīmadbhir nakuleśādyair apy etat sunirūpitam |
Śśarīram evāyatanaṁ nānyad āyatanaṁ vrajet || 607 ||
tīrtham ekaṁ smaren mantram anyatīrthāni varjayet |

This has also been well described by the venerable Nakuleśa and

others, (who say that) the body alone is the sanctuary (āyatana); one should
! Gnoli translates vāmaḥ ‘agisce come uno meno se l˚aspetta’ — ‘(one who) acts in a way one
least expectsʼ. The sense of Siva being without bias is that he is free to grace anybody at any time

irrespective of their caste status. The Law Books are considered to derive their authority from the

Vedas. The transgression of the Law — Dharma — is viewed as an essentially spiritual offence
rather than a criminal one. Thusṣ, transgression requires reparation, not punishment. The reparation

is meant to reinstate the original condition of the soul prior to the offence. This condition is

understood in terms of degrees of purity. The higher the caste, the higher the level of basic purity,
and the lower, the less. By virtue of their Brahminical status, Brahmins are the purest, and so are
authorized to deal with the sacred. According to this view, sweepers and the like are, due to the
Karma of previous lives, born inherently very impure. Thus, they are distanced from the sacred in
accord with their caste status and level of impurity. The Ānandatantra declares here that Śiva’s
interaction with individual souls is independent of such, and indeed, any other consideration.
Whom SŚiva favours by his grace, which is channelled primarily through initiation, is not
determined by considerations of purity. Thus, he acts in a manner contrary to the customs and
regulations of daily life. He may grace an outcaste or a Brahmin equally, their purity, in the
aforestated sense, is never the cause as to why he may favour one and not the other. Indeed, the
goddesses worshipped in accord with the dictates of the Ānanda and other such Tantras requires
the offering of what are normally considered impure substances, such as meat and wine.

! Emend śuddhyā to śudáhis.
! Cf. another reference from the Ánandatantra below 16/65-68ab.
! This translation assumes that dvijāntyajaiḥ should be emended to dvijāntyajāḥ and kāryā to

kāryāḥ. Another possible translation, which sticks closer to the printed text, is ‘(worship) should
be performed equally by Brahmins and members of the lowest caste’, which presumes that the
unstated substantive of kāryā is pūjā.

! MS Th reads: carvantyepi for carcānte ‘pi, which suggests the emendation carvante ‘pi.

”! 1 take 15/608cd-612ab (604cd-608ab) to be Nakuleśa’s teachings. Perhaps Nakuleśa is

Lakuleśa / Lākulīśa, who is traditionally renowned as the founder of an important branch of


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


not go to another. Recollect Mantra, the sole sacred bathing place (fīrtha).
Avoid other ones. (607-608ab) (604cd-605)

Conclusion”'

faftrrṁ ga āīcāṁ fāfēīsī úcāsīq 11| h oc 11

Ḥ-TT ēad HT¥cī T TīTcŪTH āaiī-āīq |

zfṁ #aar frr

a-Tra úzviq || ēg l|

vidhim enaṁ sṣukhaṁ jñātvā vidhijālaṁ parityajet || 608 II
samādhir niścayaṁ muktvā na cānyenopalabhyate |
iti matvā vidhānajñaḥ saṁmohaṁ parivarjayet || 609 ||
mantrasya hṛdayaṁ muktvā na cānyat paramaṁ kvacit |
iti matvā vidhānajño mantrajālaṁ parityajet || 610 ||

Having understood this injunction with ease (sukham),” one should
abandon the net of injunctions (that merely bind and confuse). (Perfect)

contemplative absorption (samādhi) cannot be attained in (any) other (way)
except

(by

the

complete)

certainty

(niścaya)

(of realization).

Once

understood this, one who (truly) knows (the nature of) what is prescribed

(vidhāna) (in this higher sense) should avoid (all) confusion (saṁmoha).

Apart from the heart of Mantra (SAUH), there is nothing else superior (to
this) anywhere. Once understood this, one who (truly) knows (the nature
of) what is prescribed should abandon the net of Mantra. (608cd-610) (606-

608ab)

ri Jvīāa-a-i s fẽq |

naivedyaṁ prāśayen nadyās taccheṣaṁ ca jale kṣipet |
tair bhukte na bhaved dosṣo jalajaiḥ pūrvadīkṣitaiḥ || 611

Pāśupata Śaivism (see below, 37/13cd-15), the immediate precursor of the Āgamic Śaivism. If he

is Nakuleśa, the passage Abhinava is presenting here from an unknown source is šurprṣiṉ.
Nakuleśa believed in the interiorization of sacred geographies. The Pāñcārthika Pāśpata Saivism
taught in the Pāśupatasūtra (c. 5" century CE) presents a picture of these Śaivites as wondering
ascetics. There is no mention there of interiorizing their itineraries. That would only be necessary

for householders or sedentary renouncers who resided in monasteries. On the other hand, the

terms here for sacred sites — ‘āyantana ‘and ‘tīrtha’, predate the Saivāgama. Had it been some
other term like ‘pīṭha’, it would have cast further doubt on this identification. If we accept the
citation at face value as drawn from teachings attributed to Lakuleśa / Nakuleśa, it appears that he
introduced an interiorized practice of the Pāśupata’s traditional itinerant lifestyle.

! Now that Abhinava has quoted a string of mostly Trika sources, he concludes by summing up
what is to be learnt from them most essentially.
Another possible translation is: “having understand that this injunction is (to experience) joy’.

TANTRĀLOKA

The food offering (naivedya) should be eaten, and the remnants

(Śeṣa) thrown into the water of a river.” There is no defect if it is eaten by
the fish, (for they must have been) previously initiated (in another life).
(611) (608cd-609ab)
Surely, (one may ask, if this is so,) what is the reason for the (common)

usage of the word ‘rule’ (samaya)”

STPJTRṬTṬGTTRTĀTKT TāĪRT:|I 23 1
avaśyapālanīyatvāt paratattvena saṅgamāt |
jñānaprāptyabhyupāyatvāt samayās te prakīrtitāḥ || 612 ||

They are called pledges (samaya) because they must be observed,

because (by means of them one) is connected (saṁīgama) with the supreme
reality, and because they are the means to attain knowledge. (612) (609cd-

610ab)

(The Rule) must be observed because of its (general well-established)

prevalence (rūḍhi). The term ‘samaya’ (to denote the Rule the initiate must
observe) is in (common) usage, because (those who observe it) reach
(samayanti), that is, understand (saṁgacchante) the supreme reality by means of

it. (Another) didactic etymology (supports its usage namely, the Rule — samaya

— is s0 called because) it is the right way (samyag ayanam) by which (one
attains) knowledge.

! Malamoud (1998: 10) explains: ‘A piece of food is called ucchista when 1Īs in fact considered
to be the remains of a bulk of food that someone has begun to eat. It is for thss reason that even

one’s own leftovers are impure for oneself. The same rules hold for the gods, concerning what is

to be done with the leftovers of sacrificial food. The Brāhmaṇas treat the mateer clearly: they

cannot be thrown into the fire, snnce that would be tantamount to offering table scraps to the gods!
The best procedure 1s that the sacrificer eat them himself, or throw them into a body of water.
These leftovers that are not to be given to the gods, it must be noted, are scraps from a meal they

themselves have eaten; and while no foreign element has come to alter this food, its status has

nevertheless changed, for the simple fact that it has continued to exist after the conclusion of the
sacrifice.
“ See below, 26/71.
The preceding verse — 1e , 612cd-613ab (608cd-609ab) — appears to be a misplaced

interpolation, that may be the result of a copyist’s error. There is n0 apparent connection between

what precedes and follows after 1t. Jayaratha refers back to what is stated in the previous verses,
completely ignoring this one. Thus, ttmay well not have been found in the manuscripts he had of
the Tantrāloka.
“This is the literal meaning of the word. The other two are derived from the root i- meaning both

‘to go’ and ‘to know.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
--------------------------------------------------


evaṁ saṁśrāvya samayān devaṁ saṁpūjya daiśikaḥ |
visarjayet svacidvyomni śānte mūrtiviḷāpanāt || 613 |I
Once the teacher has told (the neophant) the rules in this way and
has worshipped the Lord, he should dismiss Him into the tranquil space of
His own consciousness, by dissolving away (therein the mantra of His)

‘sacred body’ (mūrti). (613) (610cd-611ab)

aṟṝaftṣrcarāī] fōṛaēērr feraṛg 11 =22x 1
JIaT āṬĪ āTTTNSTPTĪTTCAT:
r--̄zgfrrāōramiī ārzá fhrr=szr 1| ēzu, 1

yadi putrakadīkṣāsya na kāryā samanantaram |
tadābhiṣiñcet sāstreṇa śivakumbhena taṁ śiśum || 614 |
ātmānaṁ ca tato yasmāj jalamūrtir maheśvaraḥ |
mantrayuṅn akhilāpyāyṝī kāryaṁ tad abhiṣecanam || 615 |I
After that, if the disciple is not to be subsequently initiated (further
into the status) of a Spiritual Son (putraka), (the teacher) should then
sprinkle (him with water) taken from Siva’s jar (consecrated) with the

Weapon, and then (sprinkle) himself (with it). The reason why this

aspersion (abhiṣecana) should be done is that the Lord in His sacred body
of water (jalamūrti) and united with the Mantra, nourishes all things. (614-

615) (611cd-613)

(He says that if the disciple is) ‘not to be’ (initiated further, he should

be sprinkled with water). The sense is that if he is to be (initiated into the status

of a Spiritual Son), the sprinkling does not take place.
He concludes the teaching (artha) of (this) chapter with the first half (of
a verse).

rfī azavṁīś vaivr frārā aiṁṁq |
iti samayadīkṣaṇam idaṁ prakāśitaṁ vistarāc ca saṁkṣepāt |
Such is the Initiation of the Rule (samayadīkṣā), that has been
explained both at length and in brief. (616ab) (614ab)
(It has been expounded) ‘at length’ (from the point of view of) the
subject, and ‘in brief” from (the point of view of its) written form (that is, the
number of verses).

The one called Jayaratha, who has (as if, like Śiva,) five faces (from

which pour forth) the unfolding (prapañca) of action of many kinds, such as

TANTRĀLOKA

that of the regular and occasional rites, has explained this the fifteenth chapter
(of the Tantrāloka).

Here ends the fifteenth chapter, called ‘an exposition of the common
initiation into the Rule (samayadīkṣā), which is in the venerable Tantrāloka,
composed by the venerable Abhinavagupta, the most excellent and great Śaiva
teacher (mahāmāheśvarācārya). It has a commentary called ‘Discernment’

(viveka), written by the venerable (rājānaka) Jayaratha.

Appendix A
The Deposition of the Mātṛkās - Mātṛkānyāsa - according to the

Maālinīvijayottara

The Basic Common Procedure
Abhinava stresses repeatedly throughout his exposition of Trika ritual
that the basic Trika rites are heralded by the purifying deposition onto the body
of the officiants and participants of three basic depositions (nyāsa). These are
three forms of the Sanskrit alphabet formed by the deities and the spiritual
energies of the letters. The first two are feminine. One is Maātrkā that is set in the
normal common alphabetical order. The other is Mālinī in which the seeds
(bīja), that is, the vowels, are mixed with the matrixes (yoni), that is, the
consonants. The third, called the Assembly of Sounds — śabdarāśi — is male. It
is made up of fifty Bhairavas who are the deities of the letters. Concerning these
depositions see TA 15/115cd-145. We begin with Mātṛkānyāsa with which the
depositions onto the body of the alphabets or parts of Mantra normally begin.

This is recorded in TĀ 15/117-120 which is drawn from MV 8/27-32. It is

normal basic procedure to begin by purifying the hands that will be used to
deposit the letters and parts of Mantra on the body. Abhinava does not record
the procedure, no doubt, taking it, for granted that it is well known. This is
followed by a deposition onto the six (sometimes five) of the body. I include
them here for the sake of completeness.
The Deposition onto the Hands - karanyāsa

Touch the thumb with the index finger, saying:



Touch the index finger with the thumb, saying:



Touch the middle finger with thumb, saying:



Touch the ring finger with the thumb, saying:

eṁ taṁ thaṁ daṁ dhaṁ naṁ aiṁ anãmikābhyāṁ hũṁ


Touch the little finger with the thumb, saying:


oṁ paṁ phaṁ baṁ bham maṁ auṁ kaniṣṭhãbhyãṁ vauṣaṭ

Rub the backs of the hands along the palms:


astrāya phaṭ

2 See TĀ 15/117cd-120

TANTRĀLOKA

Touch successively the palm and the back of the left hand with the right

forefinger and the middle finger joined together; then claps the palm with these
two fingers.
By performing the deposition of the hands (karanyāsa), that is,
identifying the fingers, palms and the back of the hand with the different sounds
of the alphabet, they are consecrated. Thus, the hands become full of the energy
of mātrṛkā.

madhyamābhyāṃ vaṣaṭ

i ap dhau au Jh a117
i

iur

ja

_Q N.

taṃ thaṃ daṃ dhaṇ naṇ

ai

fY

aṃ kaiy khaṃ gaṇt ghaṇ ṅap ā̃ṃ

""haūvikābhyā hūr ..1

I |

| i

U

karatalapr̥ṣṭhābhyām astrāya phaṭ

APPENDIX A

The Deposition on the Limbs - aṅganyāsa
Touch the chest with the index finger, the middle finger and the ring

finger of the right hand joined together, saying:

aṅ kaṁ khaṁ ghaṁ ṅaṁ āṁ hr̥dayãya namaḥ.

Touch the head with the index finger and the middle finger of the right
hand joined together, saying:
iṁ caṁ chaṁ jaṁ jhaṁ Ẽaṁ īṁ śirase svāhã.

Touch the tuft of hair on the head with thumb of the right hand, saying:



Touch the shoulder joints with all the fingers joined together, saying:

eṁ taṁ thaṁ daṁ dhaṁ naṁ aim kavacãya hiũṁ.
Touch the three eyes with the forefinger, the middle finger and the ring
finger joined together, saying:
orṁ paṁ phaṁ baṁ bhaṁ maṁ auṁ netratrayãya vauṣat.
Touch successively the palm and the back of the left hand with the right
forefinger and the middle finger joined together; then clap the palm with these

two fingers.

arṁ yaṁ raṁ laṁ vaṁ śaṁ ṣaṁ haṁ laṁ kṣaṁ aḥ karatalapr̥ṣṭhābhyām aṣtrāya

phaṭ

c

[<

ÃMNM

-~.

TANTRĀLOKA

Here, by placing the consecrated hands on the different parts of the
body with the appropriate sounds, the whole body is consecrated and
transformed into mātṛkā.


Touch the parts of the body with Tattvamudrā saying:


OM AṀ ŚRĪKAṆṬHĀYAI NAMAḤ Continue rnutatis mutandis.

[__ R̥M_1[Bhāmbhūtyai_]
_Right nostūīl (piĩgalā) _|
[|__ Sũõĩ . /{ḷ ..Ti-āai .__]|_Lcftnostilúódā)_]

APPENDIX A

hand (Bones)

hand (Marrow)
foot (Semen)
foot (Breath)

oṁ aṁ śrīkaṇṭhāyai namaḥ
oṁ āṁ anantāyai namaḥ
oṁ iṁ sūkṣmāyai namaḥ
oṁ īṁ trimūrtyai namaḥ
oṁ uṁ amarĩīśāyai namaḥ
oṁ ūṁ arghĩśāyai namaḥ
oṁ ṛmṁ bhārabhūtyai namaḥ
oṁ R tithīśāyai namaḥ
oṁ ḷṁ sthāṇṉavyai namaḥ.
oṁī Ḷṁ harāyai namaḥ
oṁ eṁ jhaṇṭhīśāyai namaḥ

Topknot
Mouth
Right eye
Left eye
Right ear
Left ear
Right nostril (piṅglā)
Left nostril (iḍā)
Ó. Right cheek
Left cheek
Lower teeth

oṁ auṁ anugrahāyai namaḥ
oṁ aṁ krũrãyai namaḥ
oṁī aḥ māhāsenāyai namaḥ
oṁ kaṁ krodhāyai namaḥ
oṁ khaṁ caṇḍīśāyai namaḥ
oṁ gaṁ pracaṅdāyai namaḥ
oṁ ghaṁ śivāyai namaḥ
oṁ ṅaṁ ekarudrāyai namaḥ
oṁ caṁ kūrmāyai namaḥ
oṁ chaṁ ekanetrāyai namaḥ
oṁ jaṁ caturānanāyai namaḥ

Upper lip
Topknot
Tongue
Right shoulder
Right arm
Right elbow
Right wrist
Fingers of the right hand
Left shoulder
Left arm
Left elbow

oṁ ñaṁ śyenāyai namaḥ
oṁ ṭaṁ someśvarāyai namaḥ

Fingers of the left hand
Right buttock

oṁ aiṁ bhauktikāyai namaḥ
oṁ oṁ sadyojātāyai namaḥ

oṁ jhaṁ ajitāyai namaḥ

Upper teeth
Lower lip

Left wrist

TANTRĀLOKA

oṁ ṭhaṁ lāṅguliṅyai namaḥ

Right thigh

oṁ ṇaṁ umākāntāyai namaḥ
oṁ taṁ niṣãḍhinyi namaḥ
oṁ thaṁ ḍiṇḍiṇāyai namaḥ
oṁ daṁ dhãtriṅyai namaḥ
oṁ dhaṁ mīnāyai namaḥ
oṁ naṁ meṣāyai namaḥ
oṁ paṁ lohitāyai namaḥ
oṁ phaṁ śikhivāhinyai namaḥ
oṁ baṁ chagalaṇḍāyai namaḥ
oṁī bhaṁ dviraṇḍāyai namaḥ
oṁṅ maṁ mahākālāyai namaḥ
oṁ yaṁ vālīśāyai namaḥ
oṁ raṁ bhujaṅgamāyai namaḥ

Toes of right foot
Left buttock
Left thigh
Left foot
Left toes
Left toenails
Right diaphragm
Left diaphragm
Spine
Stomach
Heart
Skin (Chest)
Blood (right shoulder)

oṁ vaṁ khaḍginyai namaḥ
oṁ śaṁ bakīśāyai namaḥ

oṁ haṁ lakulĩśãāyai namaḥ

Sinews (left Shoulder)
Bones (From the chest
to the right hand)
Fat (From the chest
to the left hand)
Semen (From the chest
to the left foot)
Breath (From the chest

oṁh kṣaṁ saṁvartakāyai namaḥ

Cavity of Brahmā

oṁ ḍaṁ ḍārukāyai namaḥ
orī ḍhaṁ ardhanārīśvarāyai namaḥ

oṁ laṁ pinākinyai namaḥ

oṁ ṣaṁ śvetāyai namaḥ
oṁ saṁ bhṛgavyai namaḥ

Right knee
Right shank

Flesh (neck)

to the right foot)

'Appendix B
Mālinī Deposition
Over half of Abhinava’s commentary on the Parātrīśikā is dedicated to

the first four out of its thirty-six verses. He structures it around the contents and
nature of the four levels of Speech; that is, Supreme Speech (parāvāc), the
Speech of Vision (paśyanṁī), the Middle (madhyamā) and Corporeal (vaikharī)

Speech. Abhinava expounds the Mālinī order of the alphabet in the context of
explaining the Middle Speech. Middle Speech corresponds to the level of
discursive ideation (vikalpa) which is characterīzed by the mutual
superimposition of the object of denotation (vācya) and its denotator (vācaka)
(IPVv√ 2, p. 188, 192). It extends throughout the inner mental organ
(antaḥkaraṇa), that is, the mind, ego and intellect. K. Kuṇjunni Raja has defined
Middle Speech his book, Indian Theories of Meaning (Madras 1963: 148) as
follows:
‘The next stage in the manifestation of the speech principle is called
madhyamā or the intermediate, since it lies between paśyantī and vaikharī. This
is the utterance in its phonological structure, the sound pattern of the norm. It is
psychological in its nature and can be comprehended by the intellect. All the
elements linguistically relevant to the sentence are presented in a latent form at
this stage. The same meaning will be conveyed and the same sphota [unit of
meaning] by different forms of madhyamā, depending on the language adopted.
This corresponds to prākṛtadhvani [the vernacular]. At this stage all the
individual peculiarities of the speaker are present in the utterance, along with the
linguistically relevant parts.’

In other words, Middle Speech is the plane of common language,
characterized by its various words. This is the language of discursive ideation,
not external speech. It consists of the many words, made up of the phonemes,

vowels and consonants (symbolized as seed and matrix, respectively) mixed

together. According to Abhinava, Mālinī is the alphabet, in which the order of
the letters, seeds and matrices, are mixed up, that primarily symbolizes it. He
writes in his commentary on the Parātrīśikā (pp. 148-156):
‘(PTv p. 148) In the same way, we will (now) examine how (the

principles and letters) abide (and are arranged) on the plane of the Middle
Speech, which is present within supreme consciousness, as the expansion
(vijrṛmbha) of the venerable (goddess) Parāparā. Middle Speech is located on the
plane of the Īśvara (principle), which consists of the power of action. This is the
plane over which (Iśvara) has authority. It is a state of awareness (vedana) that
covers the object (present there) in a clearly evident form. (Just as) a denotation
(vācaka) is projected (adhyaśate) onto the object of denotation (vācya), (so too,)

the object of denotation (is projected) there also (onto that which denotes it).
This projection, which consists of the mutual mixing and covering over of one

! This Appendix is with reference to TĀ 15/121-133ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

another, can only take place if the denotator, (which is projected onto any)
object of denotation in its totality, is also itself a totality, not otherwise. A cloth
cannot cover another cloth even if it is just three or four fingers too short. And
this universality is the result of the mutual mixing together of their own natures.
The vowels, which are seeds (bīja), are in the state of the denotator (vācakatva),

whereas the consonants are matrices (yoni) and (their state is that of) the object

of denotation. This is because they are, respectively, (aspects of) Śiva and Śakti,
as (they are) described (in this way) in the Mālinīvijaya (where we read):

‘Here (according to this tradition) the seed is Śiva, and Śakti is termed

the matrix (yoni)

And again:


‘(The goddess of the alphabet is) of two kinds, because (her) nature is
(both) seed and matrix. The vowels are considered to be the seed, and the matrix
is considered (to be formed) with the consonants beginning with K.”
(PTv p. 149) Śiva Himself Who, (never) forsaking His (inherent)

subjectivity, is (rightly) (considered to be) the (universal) denotator (vācaka);

(whereas) Śakti Herself, Who is immersed in the objective aspect, is the object

of denotation (vācyā). (Thus,) even on (the plane of) relative distinctions
(bheda), the denotator is (always) perceived (prathate) (and manifests) as not

being separate from the essential nature of the (perceiving) subject
(pramātṛṣvarūpa), in its two aspects as the denotator (pratipādaka) and the

object of denotation (pratipādya). The state of the matrices, that is, of the

consonants, which are Śakti, is a condensate of the seeds, that is, the vowels,
which are Śiva. This is because, as we shall explain further ahead, a matrix
extends out (and so is derived) from a seed. (Thus, the objection that could be

raised has no ground, namely that) if the matrices are already mixed with the

seeds, that is, the vowels, and so all their fruits, both liberation and worldly

benefits, would arise (spontaneously) without effort (niryamna) and without
having to first cultivate them. Moreover, the seed phonemes would be matrices
within themselves, and analogously, matrices (would be seeds), so there would

be nothing to distinguish them from one another. None of these (objections) can
disturb us, we who proclaim that Speech, which is essentially consciousness,
contains within itself the infinite variety of things. In daily life, although it is
subject to Māyā, Speech is the Light (of consciousness,) which is reflectively

aware (pratyavamarśākāriṇī) (even though) it consists of the clearly evident
(manifestation of common) empirical (laukika) phonemes and words, that are

successive and in a clearly apparent state. While (all) this is explained by others
with great difficulty, here, for those who base themselves on the foundation of
(this) teaching in this way, it is (obvious and) established effortlessly. For this
reason, we have not been too concerned to visit the homes of the masters of
grammar in vain, to get (nothing) from that except the foul-smelling body (of

MV 3/12ab.

MV 3/10cd-11a. MV 3/10d is quoted in TĀv ad 3/80cd-81ab (81).

APPENDIX B

the dead letter). (What we have said also serves to refute similar possible
objections) with regards to Mantras, such as the one consisting of nine letters
(navātman), (long) garland-like ones (mālāmantra), and so on. That is how we

justify the procedure that there should a ‘prior” and a ‘subsequent’, succession
and non-succession etc. (at the same time). (The point is that, according to this
view, Speech is both one and multiple, that is, non-successive and successive).

In this way, the main and ultimately real abode of the Middle Speech is the
goddess Mālinī, who is Śakti and Her essential nature. Thus, it is said in the

Maālinīvijayottara:

‘In order that those who are followers of the Tantras and Mantras may
achieve the desired fruits, the knower of Mantra should project into the acts of
deposition (of Mantras onto the body) that have not been performed in accord
with their specific procedures (viśeṣavidhi), Mālinī, whose (seeds are) mixed
with the matrices, in order to obtain a body of power.”
This mixture (of seeds) with the matrices has already been explained.


Thus, elsewhere also (we read):


‘One should apply Mantra to Śakti, not to the individual soul or the
supreme reality, because (they would then) be insentient (in the first case) and
inactive (in the second), and so would not give (either) worldly benefits or

liberation.”

As this is so and all things are in every (single) thing, (we will now

examine) in due order, (the nature of the first sixteen phonemes of the Mālinī

alphabet, namely) N r Ṛ | Ḷ TH C DH Ī Ṉ U Ū B K KH G, which constitute the

Śiva principle, with respect to that already expounded concerning supreme
consciousness as it is presented here (in this work). (PTv p. 152)

(1) (The sense of) hearing (N), which is a matrix and consists of the
state of (resonant) Sound (nāda), falls into the nourishing ground of the four
seeds (2-5) (r Ṛ 1 Ḷ) that nourish nectar and having (thereby) attained an

intensified (and energized) state (bṛṁhitatva).
(6) It iīmmediately assumes the state of the organ of taste (TH) (rasanā),
which is the essence of the flavours and an organ of sense.
(7) Then (after that), once it has differentiated (viśeṣībhūya) into (the
principle of) smell (C), which is Earth, it assumes, there itself,

(8) the state of the sense of touch (DH) and,

(9) having entered this condition (dhāman), which is a matrix of energy,
it is assumes (the state of) the seed of Īśvara (Ī) and

(10) is reflected in the energy of the organ of speech (Ṇ)).
(11-16) Then again, as the seeds of Expansion (unmeṣa) (U) and ascent
(ārdhvāśraya) (Ū) of the energy of (that) organ of action (karaṇa), taking as its
support the matrix of power, which is the intellect (B), penetrates completely
into the matrices of Earth (K), water (KH) and Fire (G).
The Speech of Vision is (primarily) within the (essential) nature of the

organ of speech (Ṇ) which, in accord with that (nature) extends there itself into
MV 3/34-36.
The first lne is quoted in the commentary on TA17/15

TANTRĀLOKA

the seeds (r Ṛ I L), and having done so, it abides on the plane of vision (TH >
D), impure knowledge (C > V), which is the generic (principle of perception
that underlies the organs of perception), and in the last of all of them, namely,
the sense of smell (DH > T).
Then, having progressed by means of the seed of Īśvara (Ī) and taken
the support of the power of hearing (N), by union with the two seeds of
Expansion (U) and Ascent (U), it is present in the matrix of (the genitals, which
is) the sense organ of pleasure (ānandendriya) (B > Ḍ), and (becomes) Sadāśiva

(K), Īśvara (KH) and Pure Knowledge (G). Thus, as it is present in the
beginning, middle and end of all things, the Śiva principle, which is unlimited
and possesses an infinite number of powers, is declared to be here.
(17) GH, which in relation to supreme consciousness (taught) here (in
this work) and the Speech of Vision, is Wind and Māyā, respectively (p. 153), is
(here) within Mālinī, Sadāśiva. (The following letters correspond to three
principles in the same way).

Īśvara.

(18) N, which is Ether and the Force (of limited agency) (kalā), is

(19) (The letter) I, which is the will, consisting of power, is Pure
Knowledge.
(20) A (anuttara), which is free ‘I’ (consciousness) and the (principle)

called Śiva, is Māyā.

(21) V, which is impure knowledge and smell, is the Force (of limited

agency) (kalā).

(22) BH, which is Nature (prakṛti) and the organ of locomotion (pāda),

is ĪImpure Knowledge.

(23) Y, which is time and touch, is Aṭtachment (rāga).
(24) D, which is the organ of excretion and ego, is Necessity (niyati).
(25) ḌH, which is the hands and mind (manas), is Time.
(26) TH, which is (the genitals) the organ of pleasure (ānandendriya)

and the intellect (buddhi), is the Individual Soul (puruṣa).

(27) IH, which is touch and time, is Nature (prakṛti).
(28) N, which is sound and the individual soul, is the intellect (dhī).
(29) J, which is form and Necessity, is the ego.
(30) R, which is smell and Necessity, is mind (mnanas).

(31) T, which the organ of locomotion and Nature, is hearing.
(32) P, which is the mind and hand, is skin (the sense of touch).
(33) CH, which is flavour (rasa) and attachment, is the two eyes (of the
sense of sight).

(34) L, which is attachment and flavour, is the sense of taste.
(35) Ā, which is the power of bliss and Śiva’s power (śaivī), is the
sense of smell.
(36) S, which is (Pure) Knowledge and fire, is (the organ of) speech.
(37) H, which is power of emission, is the organ of grasping.
(38) H, which is Īśvara and water, is the organ of excretion.

(39) S, which is Māyā, and wind, is the organ of pleasure.
(40) KṢ, which is Sadāśiva and earth, is the feet.
(41) M, which is the individual soul and sound, is sound.

APPENDIX B
(42) [ which is the Force (of limited agency) (kalā) and ether (nabhas),

is touch.
(43) M, which is the power of Śiva Who is called the Point (haindavī),
is form.
(44) T, which is the sense of smell and touch, is flavour.
(45) E, which the pure power of Śiva (sārttvī), is smell.
(46) AI, the same (vowel) in its long form, is ether.
(47-48) In the same way, O and AU are wind and fire. (p. 154)
(49) D, which is the sense of sight and flavour, is water.

(50) PH, which is the ego and organ of excretion, is earth.

The deployment (niveśa) (in this way) in the body (takes place) here as

stated (in the scriptures). Thus, (the holistic) state (and the teaching that) every

(single) thing is everything is (easily established) without opposition. Thus, the
moment the goddess Parā deposits, in the described manner, Her own reflected
image into the Speech of Vision, she assumes at the same time the condition of

the matrices mixed (with the seeds) in the abode of Middle (Speech) which are
established in a state of oneness with Her own nature. (Thus, She becomes)

Mālinī Who, as the variety of combinations seeds and matrices can form with

one another is infinite, has innumerable varieties, such as, for example,


Kulapuruṣa, and so She is of countless types. As is said:


‘one must sacrifice to the goddess Mālinī, who is surrounded by
innumerable Kula deities and powers.”
The yogi who is engaged in (his) practice based on this process
externally in relation to the world orders and principles and (internally the
corresponding internal) wheels, (comes to) possess particular accomplishments
(siddhi) (according to) where he is within the body or the vital breath (PTv p.
155). Just as (particular) medicinal herbs taken together give rise to a specific
result, in the same way, (practiced) together, a specific meditation or deposition

(of letters and Mantras onto the body), oblation and the like bestow a

(corresponding) specific accomplishment, because here (in this case) also, the
activity (of the power of) constraint (niyati) is not transcended.
Each (set of) scriptures (śāstra) describe a grid (prastāra) formed on the
basis of a particular deployment of the phonemes (vārṇaniveśapuraḥsara)
(within it). It consists of the aggregate (samiha) of phonemes, grouped together
in a (fixed) determined series (niyataparipāṭīpiṇḍa), as determined by the
particular primary phoneme which accords with the predominance of this or that
divine phoneme in proportion to the knowledge (vijñāana) of their followers.
(Once the manner in which the grid is to be drawn has been described, a Tantra)
describes the manner in which Mantras are extracted (mantroddhāra) from it.

(This is done) to reveal the nature of that phoneme which imparts radiant energy

(sphuraṁtā) to the Mantras that are augmented (upabṛṁhita) by imparting this
kind of vitality (vīrya) (to them). This is just (as is the case) with the venerable
Nityā Tantras, (where this method) is the reason for the predominance

Abhinava is referring here the deposition of letters and Mantras onto the body. See TĀ 15/121 f.

TANTRĀLOKA

(prādhānya) of the seed of delusion (mohana), that is, the letter AI. (Thus,) the

deployment (of letters) accords with the sequence of (letters of) the venerable
(Maālinī alphabet,) that begins with N and ends with PH, that are arranged (in
this way) due to the predominant (initial position of) the deployment (niveśa) of
the Supreme Sound (N). This is the intention (abhiprāya) which is behind the

deployment (of the letters) of the Kulapuruṣa and Kulaśakti (in another
alphabet). (The desired) result is not just to keep the Mantras and phonemes
etc. secret, (but to empower them). . . . ʼ (PTv p. 156)

The deployment of the phonemes, governed by the power of constraint,
vary in different schools in accord with the capacity of their votaries. Each of
these deployments is sustained and governed by a principal phoneme within
which, according to a particular school, the vitality of (its) Mantras is expressed.
The various deployments differ from one another, not with the intention of
keeping them secret. Rather it is because the vitality of Mantras is revealed in
various ways due to the power of constraint to which they are subject, as are all
phenomena.

Mālinīnyāsa the Deposition of Mālinī
according to the Mālinīvijayottara

The order of the letters of the Mālinī alphabet is given in MV 3/37-41ab

reproduced (with a few variants) in TĀ 15/121-125ab.

Concerning Mātṛkā and Mālinī see TĀ 15/115cd-145.

Note that the names of the Yoginīs are not listed there. I have drawn them from
the Triśirobhairava that Jayaratha quotes there in his commentary. Again, the
corresponding 7Tartvas are not noted in the Tantrāloka. They are given in MV
4/114cd-118ab also in the PTv Singh p. 104 ff. where Abhinava comments on
MV 4/125.

Cf. ṬĀ 15/128cd-130ab.

Concerning Mātṛkā and Mālinī see TĀ 15/115cd-145.

The passage in the Mālinīvijayottara says:


“O goddess, I will tell you how all this is present in the body of Mālinī I have
(just) described in which the vowels and consonants are mixed together. It is taught that
the Earth principle is (located) within the phoneme PH. One should observe the twentythree principles beginning with water and ending with Nature to be within the
corresponding phonemes beginning with D and ending with JH, respectively. Within the
group of seven phonemes beginning with TH (up to A) are, as before, the seven
(principles) beginning with the individual soul. (114cd-116ab)
The three (principles) from Pure Knowledge ending with immanent Śiva
(sakala) are in the (phonemes) I, N and GH. One should discern (how) the remaining
sixteen phonemes from G to N are within the Śiva principle. The forces, the parts (of

mantra) (pada), the mantras and the world-orders, O fair lady, should be known to be as
before distributed in that (same) numerical order as they are (in relation to) the

phonemes (of Mātṛkā).' MV 4/116cd-118ab

APPENDIX B

Touch the parts of the body with Tattvamudrā saying:

OM SAUḤ NAṀ NANDINYAI NAMAḤ
Continue mutatis mutandis. Names ending in i/ī> yai ending in ā > āyai.

S
p

is

,_.Eyes _.|

of teeth
teeth
of teeth
teeth

.23»)Y.__!|.ṬVināyaā
_J| Rāga _| _Left shoulder ]|
.Õ2)b | .Pūṇimā .|.Niyati __] .RīghtAm_]|

hand
hand

' Baumer 2011: 187 as does Singh 1988: 129-130 lists the sequential order of the five

kañcukas in reverse with respect to the sequential order Abhinava accepts in chapter
nine and is found in the MV. Thus, according to them, after Māyā in the descending

order, they are Niyati, Kāla, Rāga, Vidyā and Kalā.

T
(29) 1

]. ] ā

TANTRĀLOKA

Jayantī

Bottom of the
Trident
Trident

ÕMT. Q[.Ṛ.Vāyuvegā
| ._REars _ | __Skull__QQ_Ḥ|

35S /_/{

Ambkā ._]

Genitals__] __Belly __]|

Mālinīnyāsa
oṁ sṣauḥ naṁ nãdinyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ ṛṁ nivṛttyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ Ṛṁ pratiṣṭhāyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ lṁ vidyāyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ Ḷṁ śāntāyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ thaṁ satyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ caṁ priyadarśanyai namaḥ
oṁ ṣauḥ dhaṁ guhyaśaktyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ īṁ cāmuṇḍāyai namaḥ
oṁī sauh ṇaṁ vajriṇyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ uṁ ka”nkaṭāyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ ūṁ kālikāyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ baṁ śivāyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ kaṁ ghoraghoṣāyai namaḥ

Topknot
Head-band
Head-band
Head-band
Head-band
Top of the Head
Thīrd Eye
Eyes
Nose
Ears
Right Earring
Left Earring
Mouth
Teeth: lower right

'' The letter SA is the jīva conjoined with visarga. After that it is said (comes) the vital

breath.
sa jīvo visargayuk tatparaḥ kathitaḥ prāṇaḥ | MVT 3/39d-40a

APPENDIX B

oṁ sauḥ khaṁ śivirāyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ gaṁ māyādevyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ ghaṁ vāgīśvaryai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ ʻʻnaṁ nārāyaṇyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ iṁ mohanyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ aṁ prajñāyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ vaṁ śikhivāhinyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ bhaṁ lāmāyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ yaṁ vināyakyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ ḍaṁ pūrṇimāyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ ḍhaṁ jhaṅkvryai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ ṭhaṁ kundanāyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ jhaṁ kāpālinyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ ñaṁ dīpanyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ jaṁ jayantyai namaḥ
orī sauhḥ raṁ bhīṣaṇyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ ṭaṁ vāyuvegāyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ paṁ pāvanyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ chaṁ lambikāyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ laṁ saṁhãrikãyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ āṁ chagalyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ saṁ pūtanāyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ aḥ moṭaryai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ haṁ paramātmāyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ ṣaṁ ambikāyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ kṣaṁ icchaśaktyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ maṁ mahākālyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ śaṁ kusumāyudhāyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ aṁ śukrāyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ taṁ tārāyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ eṁ jñānāyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ aiṁ kriyāyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ oṁ gāyatryai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ auṁ sāvitryai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ daṁ dahanyai namaḥ
oṁ sauḥ phaṁ phetkārikāyai namaḥ

Teeth: Lower left
Teeth: Upper right
Teeth: Upper left
Front teeth
Tongue
Speech
Throat
Right shoulder
Left shoulder
Right Arm
Left Arm
Two hands
Nails right hand
Nails left hand
Trident: Bottom
Trident: Upper
Skul
Heart
Right breast
Left breast
Milk
Jīva
Jīva
Breath
Belly
Navel
Buttocks
Genitals
Sexual fluid
Thighs
Right knee
Left knee
Right shank
Left shank
Right foot
Left foot

TANTRĀLOKA

The Deposition of Mālinī according to the Triśirobhairava
Order

|__ 2_ |,
R_ṬnNivú
_] Head-band _|
|_ 3 ] R / [/Prayhā
_] Head-band _]|
|_ 4 [.ul Ṭ[. Vidgya___], Headband_|

ṛg -Head

|__8 {

(Priyadarśanī)

eyes

T _] Guhyaśaki ] _Nose__|

|_10 JṀ B

Third Ēye

..Vajiō _] _Mout _]|
row of) Teeth
row of)

Teeth

row of) Teeth
of)

|_ 16 Ḷ

Teeth

1] Mayādevī _] _Tongue_]|

|_ 18 /{Ḹ SN ḤĪĒ_Naṁyaī
_]| TwoEars __|
the (right) ear
the (left) ear

|_ 22_[ p 1[ MlLam _] (Righpam ]

[+ṬṀTṬ T=a=“.
ṀT~TA-THI
Trident

shoulder

' Drawn from a passage of the 7riśirobhairava quoted m TĀv ad 15/121-125ab.

APPENDIX B

|_32 _/] P..Ú.ĀPavam__]
—Heat _Ḥ]

|_ 33 .[. s ]ṄTambkā__]_Bely__]

|_36_/Ḷ._L
/] CPutīnā ___] (Lefī) brcast |
|_37 J].m.ḤḶ ._Moūī _|HMiīk _]|

|_6_ /] AI
Kryāśaki _] (Lefl knee ]
|_ 47 Ñ.ú0 Ḻ[[ Gāyaṁī _]_(Righ shank |
|_49 ] p {._Dahan
_][_ _Rightfoot__]
A Comparative Chart of the Mālinī Alphabet
Kubjikā is repeated represented in the Kubjikā Tantras as an
embodiment of Mālinī. As Mālinī does not figure in any other Kaula school, her
central importance in the Kubjikā Tantra’s clearly illustrates their close
relationship to Trika. Indeed, this deposition is very common in the Kubjikā
Tantras, in the ṢSS and KM alone, it occurs eight times.

The following comparative chart of the Mālinī alphabet table has been

prepared on the basis of the following sources. 1) KuKh 18/25 ff. 2) SSS

chapter 7. The data from this source has been tabulated by Schoterman (1982:

216-217). 3) the Ṭikā (fl.

142b) 4) MVT (3/37-41a). The latter is

Abhinavagupta’s source for his presentation in the Tantrāloka (15/121-125a).
The Mālinī letters and their corresponding Yoginīs and parts of the body are

listed in KRU 5/898. The sequential order of this series differs substantially

from the others, although the content is largely the same. The last two columns

on the right of the following table record the names of the goddesses of the
Maālinī letters according to the ŚM. The ŚM supplies a description of the
visualized form of each one. This is the only place I have found them. The
drawings made on the basis of these visualizations of these Yoginīs is found in
Dyczkowski 2007. The names listed in the penultimate column are drawn from
chapter seven of the ŚM where the goddesses are described as recorded in the
previous appendix. The last column contains the names of the goddesses linked
to the Bhairavas of the letters of the Assembly of Sounds described in chapter
twenty-four recorded in appendix VI below.

TANTRĀLOKA

Comparative Chart of the Mālinī Alphabet
KuK | Goddess
Place | MV | Goddess | Place
h
KuKhṢSS | KuKh
T

MVT
SSS

SSS

and T

SM17

ṀT | - šē. [ ḵ ], ōm ] ṭġg ḷ m ] m ]

band

band

band

band

band

band

band

[̄ṛ r -aCa

band

Third
Eye

Ca

Priyadarśanī

| všr] ḵrē. | bn [aṇē]

N

I

Guhyaśakti | Nose

SSs:
T: ?

Ears

Kaṅkaṭā | Earring | Mohanī | Prajñāśa

Earring | U

and
T: U

Mohanī

and T:
Right

SSS

earring

I” | Gandhaśakt | Nose

SSS

i

T: Ū

Ka

Teeth

Karālinyā

Lower
right

and | ṢSS and T:

Vajriṇī

T: ?

SSS:

akti

Earring | Na
SSS:
ears

KRU
T:. ?

SSS

i

Nose

SSS:

T:

Na

ti

SSS:

U
Mohanyā
SSS | SSS and T:
and

ti

Ears

Eye

SSS

Guhyaśa | Nārāyaṇī

kti

akti

kti

Kālikā | Earring | Prajñā | Guhyaśa
kti

and T:

Left

ṢSS and T:

earring

SSS:

Ka | Ghoragho | Teeth

teeth

' The texts also often link the letterĪ with Sarasvatī.

kti

ti

APPENDIX B
SSS and T:
SSS:
Kapālinyā | Lower

Ga

left
teeth

Teeth

kti

Ga | Māyādevī | Teeth

SSS:

kti

Tongue

SSS:
Upper
right
teeth
Gha | Ghoraghoṣā | Teeth | Gha | Vāgīśvarī | Teeth
Ghorā
Ghoragh
SSS:

Upper
left
teeth
Na
Vicitrā
Teeth
Na | Nārāyaṇī | Teeth | Cchirvar | Cirvarāśa

SSS:

Khirvarā
T: Vīrā

Ajayā

Front
teeth

SSS and T:

kti

kti

SSS: Bhīmā

Shoulde | Bha

SSS
and T:

Right
shoulde

]

aḵti

Right

shoulde

Ya | Vāyuvegikā | Shoulde | Ya | Vināyakī

SSS
and T:
left
shoulde

SSS and T:

Arm
SSS

and T:

Vināyakī

Arm

Left
shoulde

Arm

ti

right

arm

SSS

Dha | Jhaṅkārī

Arm | Vināyakī | Vināyakī

śakti

and
T
Tha

Vāyuveg | Vāyuveg

Left
arm

Palms | Tha | Kundanā
T: Two
hands

Two
hands

|_Ḥ /] lcchāśakti ][ Back of ] Jha ]| Kāpalinī ]Nails_] Jhañkāṅ ] Jhañkārī |

TANTRĀLOKA
SSS and T:

SSS | Jhañkārī
and
T:

Jha

the

hands
SSS:

Fingers

of the
right
hand

T: Nails

JH

SSS
and
T:

SSS and
T:
Kurdanī

Raktā

of the
right
hand
Tips of | Na

SSS:
Fingers
of the
left hand
T: Nails
of the
left hand

Tips of

SSS and Ṭ: | the nails
SSS: | Saṁjīvanī
of the
H
hand

T: ?

Nails

Kurdanī | Kurdanī

Jayantī | Trident

Icchāśakt

the na1ls
of the
hand

i

SSS and
T: Back

of the
hand
Ta | Kāpalinī T: | Skull
T: ?

SSS:

skull in

Bhīṣaṇī | Trident | Jayantī | Kapālīśa
śakti

left
hand

Nandinī

T. ?
Bottom | Ta | Vāyuvegā |

SSS and T: | of Shaft
Dīpanyā

Skull

Kapālinī

Heart

Jayantī

of the
Trident

in the

Ja

right
hand
Jayantī ṢSS | Upper

and T:

Jayantyā

part of

the

Trident
SSS:
Points
of the
Trident

SS:

ti

APPENDIX B

[-_T Pava.wa Ṁ ~T ṝ-TT
Sa

T:
Ha
Ha

TH

Parajā

SSS and T:
Ambikā

T:
Breath

La | Saṁhār | Breast

Ambikā

Parāśakti

Ambikā

Breath | Na | Chagalī | Milk

(Paramāt

Ambikā

Right

(Chagalī) | Chagalī

T: Icchā

Cha | Chagalā

T:
Cchagalaṇḍ

Self

T:
Intellect

Iiva

breast

[ā-][Ūr-N]g=

breast

kti

s

-yudhā

M | Guhyaśakti | Sexual | M
SSS: Krūrā

Ta
E

T: Śukrā

fluid

s

ā-yudhā

ukrā | Thighs

udhā

ukrā

ukrāśakti

Devī

Thighs | Ta

Thigh

Jñānaśakti

Knee
SSS

Knee

ṢSSand T.

E

and T:

Right
knee

AI | Krīyāśaku | Knee | AI | Kṁyā | Knee | Kṛīyāśakt | Kṛyāśakū
SSS

and T:

i

Left
knee

Ṃ]sn [ṇg ]p ]on fsnak Ṭaānā Jāāā I
shank

TP-ṬŪ-JĒ{P

shank
SS

The letter CH 1s also commonly associated with Chikkarī or Chivarā.

' The letter SA is the jīva conjoined with visarga. After that it is said (comes) the vital
breath.
sa jīvo visargayuk tatparaḥ kathitaḥ prãṇaḥ | MVTT 3/39d-40a

TANTRĀLOKA
and

Right

T:

foot

Pha | Phetkārikā | Foot

SSS
and

Left
foot

Phetkārik | Foot
T:

Phetkārī | Phetkārik

Appendix C
The Assembly of ŚSounds (śabdarāśi)
according to the Mālinīvijayottara

]|

Sūkṣmāya . |

_.Righteye

_.,

,___ SũPM _(]ḷ
Tihśāa ._| ._._ Leftnostil (ḍa) __._
,_ $M..QQ.| .Q.Stāṇve _] _ Rightcheek__ .—

' TĀ 15/130cd-133ab

TANTRĀLOKA

hand (Bones)
(Marrow)
(Semen)

(Breath

Touch the parts of the body with Tattvamudrā saying
Trika

OMṀ RAHARAKṢAMALAVAYŪM ŚRĪKAṆṬHĀYA NAMAḤ
Kubjikā

AIṀ HRĪṀ ŚRĪṀ HSKHPHREṀ HSAUḤ AṀ ŚRĪKAṆṬTHĀYA NAMAḤ
Or

OM HASAKṢAMALAVARAYŪM ŚRĪKANTHĀYA NAMAḤ
Śabdarāśinyāsa

oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūṁ āṁ anantāya namaḥ
oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūrṁ iṁ sūkṣmāya namaḥ
oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūṁ īṁ trimũrtyai namaḥ
oṁ rhrkṣamlvyyũṁ uṁ amarīśāya namaḥ
oṁ rhrkṣamlyyũṁ ūṁ arghĩśāya namaḥ
oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūṁ ṛṁ bhārabhũtyai namaḥ
oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūrṁ Rṁ tithīśāya namaḥ
oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūṁ ḷṁ sthāṇave namaḥ.
oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ Ḷṁ harāya namaḥ
oṁ rhrkṣamlvyyūṁ eṁ jhaṇṭhīśāya namaḥ

Forehead
Mouth
Right eye
Left eye
Right ear
Left ear
Right nostril
(piṅgalā)
Left nostril (idā)
Right cheek
Left cheek
Lower teeth

oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ oṁ sadyojātāya namaḥ
oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ auṁ anugrahãāya namaḥ
oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūṁ aṁ krũrāya namaḥ

Lower lip
Upper lip
Topknot

oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūṁ aiṁ bhauktikāya namaḥ

Upper teeth

APPENDIX C

oṁ ṛhrkṣamlvyūṁ aḥ māhāsenāya namaḥ
oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ kaṁ krodhāya namaḥ
oṁ ṛhrkṣamlvyūṁ khaṁ caṇḍīśāya namaḥ
oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūrṁ gaṁ pracaṅdāya namaḥ

Tongue
Right shoulder
Right arm
Right elbow

orī rhrkṣamlvyūṁ ghaṁ śivāya namaḥ

Right wrist

oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ phaṁ śikhivāhine namaḥ

Left diaphragm

oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūṁ “naṁ ekarudrāya namaḥ

Fingers of the right
hand
oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūṁ caṁ kũrmāya namaḥ
Left shoulder
oṁ ṛhrkṣamlyyūṁ chaṁ ekanetrāya namaḥ
Left arm
oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ jaṁ caturānanāya namaḥ
Left elbow
oṁ ṛhrkṣamlyyūṁ jhaṁ ajitāya namaḥ
Left wrist
oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūrṁ ñaṁ śyenāya namaḥ
Fingers of the left
hand
oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūrṁ ṭaṁ someśvarāya namaḥ
Right buttock
oṁ ṛhrkṣamlyyūṁ thaṁ lāṅguliṅe namaḥ
Right thigh
oṁ ṛhrkṣamlvyūṁ daṁ ḍãrukāya namaḥ
Right knee
oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūṁ ḍhaṁ ardhanārīśvarāya namaḥ 30. Right shank
oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūrṁ naṁ umākāntāya namaḥ
Toes of right foot
oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūrṁ taṁ niṣāḍhine namaḥ
Left buttock
oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ thaṁ ḍiṇḍiṇāya namaḥ
Left thigh
oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūṁ daṁ dhātriṅe namaḥ
Left foot
oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ dhaṁ mīnāya namaḥ
Left toes
oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ naṁ meṣāya namaḥ
Left toenails
oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūṁ paṁ lohitāya namaḥ
Right diaphragm
oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ baṁ chagalaṇḍāya namaḥ
oṁ rhrkṣamlvyyūṁ bhaṁ dviraṇḍāya namaḥ
oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ maṁ mahākvlāya namaḥ
oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ yaṁ vālīśāya namaḥ
oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ raṁ bhujaṅgamāya namaḥ

Spine
Stomach
Heart
Skin (Chest)
Blood (right
shoulder)

oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūṁ laṁ pinākine namaḥ
oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūṁ vaṁ khaḍgine namaḥ

Flesh (neck)
Sinews (left

oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ śaṁ bakīśāya namaḥ

Bones (From the
chest to the right hand)
Fat (From the chest

oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ ṣaṁ śvetāya namaḥ
oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ saṁ bhṛgave namaḥ
oṁ rhrkṣamlvyyūṁ haṁ lakulīśāya namaḥ
oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ kṣaṁ saṁvartakāya namaḥ

Shoulder)

to the left hand)

Semen (From the
chest to the left foot)
Breath (From the

chest to the right foot)

Cavity of Brahmā

TANTRĀLOKA

A Comparative Chart of the Contents of the Assembly of Śounds
The series of letters, Bhairavas and corresponding parts of the body of
the Assembly of Sounds are listed in several places in the Kubjikā sources.
These include the KM (24/4-20 (in the reverse order), SSS (7/466), KRU (5/50
ff.) and the Tīkā (MS K fl. 140a—140b). The ŚM is the only source I have been

able to trace that presents a description of the visualized forms of the Bhairavas.

Based on them drawings have been published in Dyczkowski 2007: >>>. The
series is well known generally in the Tantras of other schools of the early period
and the later ones. We also find it, for example, in the Svacchandatantra (2/29-

35), Aggnipurāṇa (145/28-30; 293/41-47), and the Śāradātilaka (2/29-35).

The fifty letters and their location in the body are noted in chapter 19 of
the KuKh, however the Bhairavas are not named there. Presuming that their
names are those listed in chapter six (KuKh 6/14-20), they have been entered
first in column two. The variants of these names in the KM (24/20) and SSS
(38/4-20) are noted next to those of the KuKh. The first variant is from the KM

and the second from the SSS. Significantly variant names found in the

Śāradātilaka (2/29-35) are noted in the third column along with those of the

Tīkā. The locations of the letters and Bhairavas in the body noted in the fourth
column are taken from chapter nineteen of the KuKh. Variants in the KM and
SSS are noted in brackets in italics. Those of the KnT have been noted in the
last column on the right. A compartment is left empty if the entry agrees with
the corresponding one to the left of it.

A Table of the Letters, Bhairavas and Locations of the Assembly of Śounds
Letter

Bhairava

KuKh / KM, SSS

Bhairava

Location in

the Body

Location in

the Body

and

KuKh

(KM, SSS)

(KnT)

(forehead)

,_ A. |. Anaūua._ | ...-LIT Mouh __] _Ī]
,_Ṃ /|Ṃ Sūkbṣma., _].._IRighteye_]____]
_
Caturmūrtika (?)

,_ U_|Amarṁśa/Amaṁn_]|
Vaṅśa_| .Rightear ] ___.__|
,_úŪ ]| Arghīa/Arghin ] Arghīśa | lLeftear _]| _ d]|
(piṅgalā)

Letter

Atithi

Bhairava
KuKh /KM, SSS

Bhairava

Location in
the Body

ST

(KM, SSS)

and

KuKh

Location in
the Body
(KNT˚)

,_1! /|.._shau / ] “’_ Rightcheek ] __.__]
__ ḺḶ. J|, ._Haa __/].-.-|LTReficheek._]|

APPENDIX C

H
~N TṀgag7 |, -] T-v [Z

IkR
HH
g]praa-7

_ EÉ [.QJhanhśa_._]_ ._TTLowerteet ] .__]
Bhautin

Sadyadeva

ŚT: Akrūra

of Brahmā)

,_Ka | .Krodha _ ]_Kruddha ]_Rightshoulder | _._._._,
Kha

Ga

/ Pracaṅḍa

Right arm
(middle of the

T and ST:

Right elbow

Pañcāntaka

Right hand
(also in

ú Ia
Śivottama

Ekaruḍra

(upper part of
hand)

Fingers of the

Nails

HHB
rē]rsāzgr
-] Ū--- Ṭāx
(front of hand)

,.a |_Kūma___]
_" CT| " L-eftshoulder ]| _.._.,
(armpit

Caturānana

Na

yena /

arm)

Kūrma (?) / | Fingers of the

buttock)

Lāṅgalin

Ardhanārin

See above, note to 6/31-33ab.

(thigh)

ŚT: Dāruka

(middle of
knee

(shank)

Nails

TANTRÃLOKA
Letter

Bhairava
KuKh/KM, SSS

Bhairava

and

Location in
the Body
KuKh

Location in
the Body
(KnT)

[r-]ra-N --T,Ṁzãṛ -- >

KM, SSS)

foot (right foot)
(buttock)

I=ḤB`irē.

[ī-]Cr=--ṬN
r̥r [ō--(Daṇḍi)

Dhātṛṟudraka /

ŚT: Daṇḍin

(thigh)

Kṣameśa or

Left knee

ŚT: Syadriī

knee

Left foot

S—ṀTI.dN|TxaRaā]

shank

foot (left foot

IHHHĒṈ ÑṄEHĒEHĒENĒEN hNĒEḤ INNH DPHM
ĪHHHEṈ ĪEEHEĒEENĒE BĀÉNENHN INNHN IĀHN

iI-JJIBṚBRAĀĪĒ
[o-][prāṀg_-]Ṁ]

Lohita

Pha

ikhivāhin /

| ..|| -ṇ -n | .1
Right

Left diaphragm

Ba |Chagalaná_J]|...._I
Spine ]Q._.__|
Bha | Dviraṇḍa _]._Q_Ṛ___Ī|
~Navel _ .._.

Heat _.] ...._]
Ya ˚|..vāīaa __| .._B..NISkn_._|...._`
Bhujaṅgama /

Blood

,_Va _[| Khaḍga/Khadgin |Khaḍgīaa |._Sinews _]| .._.._|
Sa

Bakānanada /

Bones

|Sa | Svetaka/Śveta |_.,__ |HMarow__|...._
,Sa /| lakuliv√Bhṛgu | ._ʼʼ_Ī| Semen __]|Q._..._

7] =- Ṁ
(SSS Kh: Lakulin

,_ KṢa | Saṁvartakā] Saṁvara ] .Anger _]| ._.._.]|

Appendix D

The Formation of the Trident Throne!
The Deposition of the Throne (āsananyāsa)
According to the Śvacchandatantra 2/55ab-84, with Kṣemarāja’s
Commentary
The account of the Throne described in the Svacchandatantra only
extends up to Mahāpreta, on which Svacchandabhairava sits. Kṣemarāja
significantly identifies him in his pervasive state as the oneness of the Throne
with the Bhairava of Consciousness - Cidbhairava — to whom he refers in his
commentary on the Vijñānabhairavatantra as a synonym of Vijñānabhairava.
This identification here not only implies that Svacchandabhairava’s deepest,
pervasive identity is consciousness, it also implies that he is the Bhairava of the
Trika teachings tramsnitted in the Vijñānabhairavatantra. Thīs is the Bhairava
who sits on this Throne.
We observe as we read its description in the Svacchandatantra and
Kṣemarājā’s elaboration in his commentary, that practically all the constituent
layers of this seat are incorporated into the Trident Throne up to this level. Here
the Throne is a lotus. The equivalent of the Staff of the Trident is the stem of the

lotus. On the lotus lies the Great Ghost — mahāpreta who is identified
with Sadāśiva, laughing and red-eyed. On him sits Svacchandabhairava.
There we reach the summit. Three prongs that emerge from the navel of the
Greast Ghost ṛeplace Svacchandabhairava and so the lotus becomes the
Trika Trident.

Thus as we ascend along it, we journey through the history of the

development of the Saiva schools. This is said to be mirrored by their
developing excellence. Accordingly, Abhinava notes at what level along the
Trident other schools locate the summit of their throne but does not relate that to

their historical development. This is as one would expect - Śiva’s word is
eternal. Even so, we may surmise that the Svacchandatantra precedes the

Trika Tantras. A comparision of this account with the one in chapter eight of the
Mālinīvijayottara (verses 54 to 83ab) upon which Abhinava’s account is based
(in TĀ 15/297-318) shows that the details are similar (see below where all of
chapter eight of the Maālinīvijayottara has been translated). The essential
difference is that the Trika Trident continues beyond Svacchandabhairava’s
Throne (āsana) described in following passage drawn from the
Svacchandabhairavatantra. This is done by having the three prongs of the
Tṛident emerge from the navel of the Greast Ghost. We turn now to the text.
First. The Tantra, then Kṣemarāja’s commentary.
ātmānaṁ bhairavaṁ dhyātvā tato hṛdyāgama ācaret |
puryaṣṭakaśarīram api bhairavīkartum ayaṁ prakrama ārabdhaḥ l||

See TĀ 15/297-318.

VBh p. 1: iha śrīmān cidbhairavaḥ pūrṇāhaṁvimarśātma-.

TANTRÃLOKA

tatra yājyasya bhairavarūpasyātmana āsananyāsaṁ tāvad vitatya nirūpayati -Having meditated on oneself as Bhairava, one should take (that
identification) to heart. (55ab)

This procedure now commences in order to also make the subtle body
(puryaṣṭakaśarīra) one with Bhairava. There (in that regard, the Tantra goes on)
to describe extensively the deposition of the seat of the object of worship, which
is oneself in the form of Bhairava.
nābhau kandaṁ samāropya nālaṁ tu dvādaśāṅgulam || 55 ||
hṛdantaṁ kalpayed yāvat tatra padmaṁ vicintayet |
aṣṭapatraṁ mahādīptaṁ keṣarālaṁ sakarṇikam || 56 ||
kandaṁ padmotpattimūlam, samāropya parikalpya, mattagandhapīdanayuktyā
ca kandaṁ nãbhau nãbhiviṣaye samāropya ullāsya, nālaṁ prāṇaśaktirūpam,
nābhiḥṛdayāntarālasya dvādaśāṅgulatvāt dvādaśāṅgulam ity uktam ||
Havīng projected the bulb (kanda) (at the base of the Throne) into the
navel, imagine that the stalk, which extends for twelve finger-breadths, ends
into the heart. Imagine a lotus there. It has eight petals and is very brilliant. It
has stamens and a calyx. (55cd-56)

The bulb is the root from which the lotus emerges. ‘Having projected’
means ‘having imagined’. The bulb is projected, that is, pushed up, ‘into the
naveḷʼ, that is, within the area of the navel, by the practice of clenching the anus
(mattagandha). ʻThe stalkʼ is the energy of the vital breath (prāṇaśakti). As the
distance between the navel and the heart is twelve fingerbreadths, it is said to
‘extend for twelve finger-breadths’.
atra vyāptīm āha ---kandaṁ śaktimayaṁ tatra nāle vai kaṇṭakās tu ye |
bhuvanāni ca tāny eva rudrāṇāṁ varavarṇini |l 57 ||
māyātmako bhaved granthir aśuddhādhvavyavasthitaḥ |
vidyāpadmaṁ mahādīptaṁ karṇikābījarājitam || 58 II
puṣkarāṇi ca deveśī tatra vidyeśvarāḥ smṛtāḥ |
evaṁ dhyātvā mahāpadmaṁ sarvadevamayaṁ śubham |l 59 ||
He states the extent (of each one) here (as follows).

‘(One should imagine) that the bulb is made of energy. O most excellent
lady, the thorns there on the stalk are the worlds that belong to the Rudras. The
knot is Māyā, and it is located on the impure path. The lotus of knowledge is
very brilliant and is adorned with a calix and seeds. O mistress of the gods, the
blue lotuses there are said to be Vidyeśvaras. Having meditated on (that), the

auspicious great lotus made of all the gods.” (57-59)

APPENDIX D

kalpayed ity anuvartate | Śśaktir icchātmā pārameśvarī ādhārabhūtā yasyāṁ
viśvam idam ādhirayate sā "'vyomākārām” iti vakṣyamāṇatvāt garbhīkṛtadharāditattvacatuṣṭayā | yathoktaṁ śrīpūrvaśāstre ---ādāv ādhāraśaktiṁ tu nābhyadhaś caturaṅgulām |
dharāṁ surodaṁ potaṁ ca kandaś ceti catuṣṭayam || (8-55)
iti | tatra aptattvavyāptyā surārṇavam, tejovyāptyā khyātaṁ (potam),
prāṇaprasūtihetuṁ vyūhātmakaṁ vāyuvyāptyā kandam ity evaṁvyaktikā śaktiḥ
prakrtaṁ rũpaṁ yasya tat sāram ity arthaḥ | ata eva aṅkuranālarūpāśeṣādhvavyakteḥ
tatra
gandhatanmātrādikalātattvāntanālavyāptiḥ
)
rudrãṇãm .iti rtattattattvādhiṣṭhātRṇām | mahādīptam iti śuddhādhvavartyaśeṣamantratejomayatvāt | puṣkarāṇi bījāni | vidyeśvarāh anantabhaṭṅṭārakādyāḥ Śśikhaṇḍyantāḥ | evaṁ kandanālagranthidalakarṇikābījarūpaṁ
sṣaḍuttham āsanaṁ prasiddham || 59 1|
(The diction) ‘one should imagine’ follows (each item listed). ‘“Energy’

is the will of the Supreme Goddess who is the foundation (ādhāra) within which

this universe is sustained and, as will be explained, her ‘form is the Sky’ and so
encompasses within herself the four principles (that is. the Great Elements),

Earth and the rest. As is said in the Mālinīvijayottara:

‘First of all, the Energy of the Foundation (should be projected into the

base of the Trident) four fingers below the naval. (Then) the four, that is, Earth

(dharā), the Ocean of Wine (suroda), the Boat (pota) and the Bulb (kanda).”

There, the Ocean of Wine is due to the pervasion of the principle of
Water, and the Boat by the pervasion of Fire. The Bulb is the cause of the birth
of the vital breath (prāṇa) and consists of the aggregate (of all the vital
energies). By virtue of the pervasive presence of Wind, energy is the Bulb that
makes it manifest in this way. That is its material nature, which is its essence.
This is the meaning.
Thus, ‘thereʼ the stalk pervades from the subtle element of smell up to
the principle of the Force (of limited agency) because all the Path manifests in
the form of the sprout and the stalk. The ‘Rudras’ are the governors of (their)

respective principles. (The lotus is) ‘very brilliant’ because it is made of the
radiant energy (tejas) of all the Mantras present on the Pure Path. ‘The blue
lotusesʼ are the seeds. The ‘Vidyeśvaras’ are those (wWho belong to the group)
beginning with the venerable Ananta and ending with Sikhaṇḍin. In this way, it
is well known that the seat originates thus from the six, namely, the bulb, stalk,

knot, petals, calix and seeds.

āsananyāse kramam āha ---Śaktinyāso bhavet pūrvaṁ kandaṁ tu tadanantaram |
aṅkuraṁ nālavinyāsam anantaṁ parikalpayet || 60 ||
tejomayaṁ mahāśubhraṁ sphuratkiraṇabhāsvaram |
MV 8/55.

TANTRĀLOKA

The sequence in which the seat is deposited is stated (next).
Energy is deposited first, then after that, the bulb. The deposition of the
sprout and the placement of the stalk (follows. Then) one should imagine
Ananta, who is made of radiant energy, very bright and shining with brilliant

rays. (60-61ab)

visvollekhabhittibhūtām icchāśaktim āviśya tadavaṣṭambharāpaṁ kandam
ākramya
.tadunmeṣatatprasararūpāṅkuranālātmakam

adhvānam āsūtrya tadupari anantaṁ vidyeśaṁ tejomayaṁ smaraṇamātreṇa

kalpayed ity arthaḥ l| 60 ||

nālḷaṁ vinyasya yad uktaṁ anantaṁ parikalpayet iti, tanmadhye
granthisthāne siṁhāsanaṁ tadupari ca padmaṁ krameṇa kalpayitum āha ---Having penetrated into ‘the energy° of the will, which is the surface

(bhitti) onto which the universe is inscribed, and crossed over into ‘the bulbʼ,
which is the pillar (that rises from) it, and then, having outlined the entire Path

up to the end of Māyā, which is ‘the stalk and the sprout’ in the form of the
extending flow of its unfolding, ‘one should imagine’, just by means of the
memory alone, the Vidyeśa Ananta, who is ‘made of radiant energy’.
After having taught ‘the placement of the stalk’ and imagined Ananta,

the (following) is said so as to imagine, in due order, in the middle of that,
where the Knot is located, the throne (siṁhāsana) and, above it, the lotus.

dharmaṁ jñānaṁ ca vairāgyam aiśvaryaṁ ca kramān nyaset || 61 |

ete ca ---sitaraktapītakr̥ṣṇā āgneyyādīśadiggatāḥ |
pādakāḥ siṁharūpās te trinetrā bhīmavikramāḥ || 62 ||
One should deposit Dharma, Knowledge, Dispassion and Lordship in
due order. (61cd)

And these:

White, red, yellow and dark blue (respectively), they are (located) in the
(intermediate) directions, beginning with the southeast and ending with the

northwest. These souls (pādaka), in the form of lions, have three eyes and their

valour is ferocious.

pādakā iti etadvāsanānuviddhā hi saṁsaranti saṁsāre ity aśeṣasaṁsāriṇaḥ
ajñātāḥ pādāḥ pādakāḥ, ete sūṁharūpā iti parākramamahimnā, aśeṣaviśvākramaṇāt | īśvaraśaktyadhiṣṭhāne evaitad eṣāṁ ghaṭate na tu sāṁkhyanaye
jaḍābuddhidharmarūpatāyām itīśvaraśaktyadhiṣṭhānād ete trinetrāḥ, ghorasaṁsāraghātahetutvāc ca bhīmavikramāḥ || 62 ||
The ‘souls’, pierced through by these latent traces, wander around in the
world of transmigration. (Thus,) they are all the transmigrating beings who are

APPENDIX D

ignorant of (their) state (pāda). They have ‘the form of lions’ because of the
greatness of their valour, and because they extend over the entire universe. This

happens for them under the presidency of Iśvara’s power, not, as Sāṁkhya
teaches, due to the existence of the nature (dharma) of the insentient intellect.

Thus, because (they are) sustained by the power of Īśvara, they ‘have three
eyesʼ. “Their valour is ferocious’ because they are the cause of the fierce blows
of transmigratory existence.

ete ca mumukṣuṇā ---śivaśaktimayā mantrā nyastavyā vīravandite |

vastutaḥ

parameśvaraśaktmayā

eva,

tathā

tv

aparijñātā

adhara-

padasañcāriṇaḥ | yadā tu yathā pratyabhijñāyante, tadā mananatrāṇadharmakāḥ pratyabhijñātuḥ Śśivasya icchayā mantrarūpatāṁ prakaṭayantaḥ
śuddhaprasaraṇiṣaṁsāriṇo bhavanti bhaktibhāja iti paramārthaḥ, na tv
anyathaiṣāṁ mantrarũpatã kãcit, aśuddhādhvavyavasthiteḥ ||

One who desires liberation should
‘deposit these Mantras made of Śiva’s power.’ (63ab)
In reality, (Mantras are living beings) made of the Supreme Lord’s
power. Not known to be such, they wander on lower planes. If they are
recognized to be such, then they are transmigrating beings who are on the Pure

Path and their nature as Mantra is revealed by the will of Śiva, who is the one

who recognises (them to be such, namely,) as possessing the attributes of
contemplation (manana) and salvation (trāṇa). (Thus,) in reality they possess
(great) devotion. Their nature as Mantra is not any other (than this) because they
are on the Impure Path (it is always as it is when they are on the Pure Path).
siṁhāsane ‘vayavāntarāṇy āha ---adharmājñānāvairāgyam anaiśvaryaṁ ca prāgdiśaḥ || 63 1
uttarāntaṁ niveśyaṁ tu...............
ete hi ---...........Qātrakāḥ sitavarṇakāḥ |
siṁhāsanapaṭṭikārūāpāḥ | prāyaśca sarve "khyātimayamāyācchāditatvād
adharmādimayāḥ, ata eva dharmādīn prati sprhayālava ity adharmādaya eṣāṁ
māyāpade ajñātāni gātrakāṇi || 63 ||
atraiva ---He names the other parts of the throne.

‘Adharma, Ignorance, lack of dispassion and lack of lordship should be
placed in the (primary) directions (beginning with) the east and ending with the
north. Their bodies are white.” (63cd-64ab)

TANTRĀLOKA

(They are) the pieces of cloth (that cover) the throne. Generally, all
things consist of Adharma etc. because they are covered over by Māyā, which is
ignorance. They long for Dharma and the rest (that are their positive
counterparts). Thus, on the plane of Māyā, the bodies of Adharma and the rest
are unknown. Here itself (in the same place it is said):
saṁáhãnakĩlakãś caiva atasīpuṣpasaṁnibhãḥ || 64 ||
vedā yugāś ca te caiva jñātavyāḥ kramaśaḥ priye |
āgneyyādikrameṇa
pratikoṇaṁ
pādakena
saha
gātrakadvayasya
bandhanārthaṁ kīlakadvayam iti | r̥gādayo vedāḥ, kṛtādayaś ca yugās
tattadbhogavāsanāḥ puṣṇantaḥ saṁsārabandhanahetavo vicitraśaṅkāśaṅkurūpāḥ saṁdhānakīlakā ity uktāḥ | bandhakatvād eva ca kṛṣṇavarṇā jñātavyāḥ |

pūrvoktapārameśvaraśaktirūpatayā yathā ajñātā bandhakā bhavanti | nanu ete
buddhidharmāḥ katham ūyatīṁ bhūmiṁ prāptāḥ? ucyate ---- sarveṣāṁ
buddhyādidharmāṇāṁ māyotpattibhūḥ, buddhyādayas tu vibhavasthānam,
ucchedyās tu mūlabhūmita ucchinnā na punaḥ prarohantīty utpattipadād
ucchettum etānīdṛkkramo darśitaḥ || 64 1|

‘“(They are) the nails that hold (the throne together). They are (dark

blue) like atasī flowers. O beloved, one should know them in due order to be the
Vedas and (four cosmic) Ages.” (64cd-65ab)

In each corner, in due order beginning with the southeast, there are two
nails that serve to hold together the two bodies with the feet (of the throne)
(pādaka). The nails that hold (the throne together) are said to be the (four)
“Vedas’ beginning with the Ṛk (Veda), and the (four cosmic) ‘Ages’ beginning
with Kṛta, that nurture the latent traces of each worldly experience. The cause of
the bondage of transmigratory existence. Their form consists the (many and)
various doubts and fears. They should be known to be black because they are
binding. They are binding when not known to be the Supreme Lord’s power
mentioned previously. Surely, (one may ask), how can these qualities of the
intellect have attained such (an extensive) plane (of existence)? (In response to
this question) it is said that qualities (of Nature), such as the intellect and the

rest (mentioned here), are products of Māyā. The intellect and the rest is the

location of the development (of the Qualities). They should be cut away from
the plane in which they are rooted. (Once) severed (from it), they no longer

grow again. Such is this process (krama) which, like this, (serves) to sever them
from the plane of (their) origin.
ata eva sattvarajastamāṁsi mūlata evocchettuṁ siṁhāsanopari guṇamayam eva
māyām aṣūrakaṁ nyasitum āha ---adhaśchādanam ūrdhvaṁ ca raktaṁ śuklaṁ vicintayet || 65 ||
madhye tamo vijānīyād guṇās tv ete vyavasthitāḥ |

APPENDIX D

Thus, in order to sever sattva, rajas and tamas from (their very) root,

(the following) is said s0 as to place the piḷlow (asūraka), that is, Maāyā, that is

made of all (three) qualities, onto (this level of) the throne:

‘One should think that the lower and upper covers are red and white

(respectively). One should know that darkness (tamas) is in the middle. These

are the qualities arranged (in this way).’ (65cd-66ab)

ūrdhvaṁ śuddhavidyānikaṭavartitvāt sitaṁ sattvarāpam | adhas tu saṁsaraṇānuguṇatvād raktaṁ rajomayam | madhye tu khyātyācchādanaprakarṣāt tamomayaṁ kṛṣṇam | prādhānikaḥ prapañco māyāyām asann ityādi tv asat,
aśeṣamāyākāryasya māyāyāṁ sūkṣmarūpatayā bhuvanādhvavarṇayiṣyamāṇasthityāvasthityāvasthitatvāt | śaktipātapavitrais tu sarvaṃ etac chivaśaktirūpaṁ
mantratayaiva bhavanīyam | yad vakṣyati ---yatra yatra ity upakramya, sarvam śivamayaṁ yataḥ |l iti |)
(The cover) above is close to Pure Knowledge and so is white and its
nature is sartva. The quality (of the one) below is consonant with that of

transmigratory existence and so is red and made of rajas. In the middle, (the

space between them), is black and made of tamas, because of its great capacity
(prakarṣa) to veil knowledge. ‘The creation (that proceeds) from fundamental
nature (pradhāna) does not exist within Māyā’. According to this view, it does
not exist because the entire product of Māyā is located within Māyā in a subtle
form arranged as the Path of the Worlds (in the manner that) will be explained.

Those who have been sanctified by a descent of the power (of grace) should

contemplate all that, the nature of which is Śiva’s power, as Mantra. As will be

said (further ahead in the passage beginning with) ‘wherever’ and (ending with)

‘as everything is made of Śiva.’

atha siṁhãsanam asūrakopari vidyāpadmaṁ nyasitum āha ---sitaṁ padmaṁ vijānīyāt keṣarāṇi vicintayet || 66 ||
sitaraktaprapītāni mūḻlamadhyāgradeśataḥ |

karṇikā hemasaṅkāśā bījāni haritāni tu | 67 1

īdṛgvarṇam eva sitapadmaṁ bhavati | sitatvaṁ cāsya śuddhavidyāmayatvāt |
asya daleṣu devatānyāsam āha ---Now, in order to place the Lotus of Knowledge on the throne, on top of
the pillow (asūraka) (he says):

The word ‘asūīraka’ means both ‘demon’ and ‘pillow.
SVT 4/3134.

yatra yatra mano yāti jñeyaṁ tatraiva cintayet |

calitvā yāsyate kutra sarvaṁ sśtvamayam yataḥ || 4-313 ||

‘(For such a great yog1,) wherever (his) mind goes, he should think that (the supreme

reality) which 1s to be known 1s there. As everything is Śiva (sśivamaya), having moved (from one

place), where will it go (that is not Śiva)?’ SVT 4/313

TĀANTRĀLOKA

‘“Know that there is a white lotus (there). Think that the stamens are

white, red and yellow, at the root, in the middle and in front (respectively). The

calyx is (white) as snow and the seeds are green.’ (66cd-67)

The white lotus has these colours. It is white because it is (the principle

of) Pure Knowledge. Now he teaches the projection of the deities onto its petals:
vāmāṁ pūrvadale nyasya jyeṣṭhāṁ vahnidalāśritām |
raudrīṁ dakṣiṇapatre tu kālīṁ nairṛtagocare || 68 II
kalavikaraṇīṁ devīṁ vinyasyed vāruṇe dale |
balavikaraṇīṁ devīṁ vāyavyadalamāśritām || 69 ||
balapramathanī devīmuttare viniyojayet |

sarvabhūtadamanīṁ ca eśānyāṁ viniyojayet || 0 |

madhye manonmanīṁ devīṁ karṇikāyāṁ niveśayet |
‘Place Vāmā on the eastern petal. Then Jyesthā is placed on the
southeastern petal. Raudrī is on the southern petal and Kaālī is in the area of the

southwest (nairṛta). The one (called) Kalavikaraṇī should be deposited on the

western petal. The one (called) Balavikaraṇī is located on the petal in the
northwest. The goddess Balapramathanī should be allocated to the north and
Sarvabhūtadamanī to the northeast. The one called Manonmanī should be placed
in the middle of the calyx.” (68-71ab)

spaṣṭam etat || 70 || erac ca ---śakracāpanibhaṁ devi dhyātavyaṁ śaktimaṇḍalam || 71 I|
tato ʻpi ---madhye sūryasahasrābhāṁ cintayet tu manonmanīm |
etā devyo bhuvanādhvanītyā pareṇa rūpeṇa śaktitattve sthitāḥ, madhye tu pade
parāpareṇa, iha tu vidyāyām apareṇa rūpeṇeti vibhāgaḥ | tatraiva cāsāṁ
nāmānusāri svarūpaṁ darśayiṣyāmaḥ, sarvaṁ prāguktaśaktitrayamayam iti ||

vidyātattve mānameyamātrrūpaṁ jñānakriyecchāvyāptisatattvaṁ maṇḍalatrayaṁ nyasitum āha ----

This is clear. Moreover,

‘O goddess, one should meditate on the circle of energies to be like

Indra’s bow.” (71cd)


Then also:

‘One should think of Mind Beyond Mind, shining like a thousand suns,
in the centre.” (72ab)

In terms of the teaching concerning the Path of the Worlds, these
goddesses are present in the principle of power (śaktitattva) in their supreme
(para) form. On the plane in the centre, they are intermediate (parāparā) and

here, within Vidyā, (they are) in the lower (apara) form. This is the division
(between them). There itself (where the Path of the Worlds is taught), we will

APPENDIX D

explain their nature in accord with their names (and how) everything is made of
the three powers mentioned previously.
(Now the following) is said, in order to deposit within the principle of
Knowledge the three circles (maṇḍala) that are the means (of knowledge),

object and subject, and the pervasion of knowledge, action and the will
(respectively).
sūryādhvamaṇḍalaṁ patre somaṁ saṁṇyojya kesare || 72 ||
vahnimaṇḍalakaṁ devi karṇikāyāṁ niveśayet |
atra hi meyarūpasya somasya vahnisūryātmakamātrmānamadhyavartitvam, na
hi mātṛprakāśabhittīṁ vinā mānaprakāśācchuraṇaṁ vinā vā meyaprakāśaḥ
kaścit | pramātraiva hi cidrasāśyānībhāvātma meyam ābhāsyate, ābhāsyamānaṁ ca pramāṇaprakāśācchuritam eva bhavatīty alam adhikena; (vistṛtaṁ
ca) bhaviṣyaty etat sṛṣṭisaṁhãrapaṭale || 72 ||
etad dhāmatrayādhiṣṭhātṛdevatātrayaṁ nirūpayati tadadhiṣṭhātṛviśvāntar-bhāvam atra prakaṭayitum ---‘Place the Circle of the Path of the Sun on the leaves and conjoin the
Moon to the stamens. O goddess, place the Circle of Fire in the calyx. (72cd-

73ab)

Here the Moon, which is the object of knowledge, is in between the
subject and means of knowledge that are Fire and the Sun (respectively). There
is no light of objectivity of any kind without the screen of the light of the subject
(onto which it is projected) and the pervasive presence of the light of the means
of knowledge. It is the perceiver alone, who is the condensed state of the
aesthetic savour of consciousness, that illumines the object of knowledge. That
which is made manifest (‘illuminedʼ) is pervaded by the light of the means of
knowledge. Now enough of excessive (talk). (This) will be (taught) extensively

(later) in the chapter devoted to emanation and withdrawal. The three presiding
deities of these three abodes is (now going to be) described. (The following) is
said in order to elucidate the universal inner state of the presiding (deities) of
that (triple abode):

brahmā viṣṇur haraś caiva maṇḍaleṣy adhipāḥh smṛtāḥ || 73 Il
parāparayā vyāptyā eṣāṁ dhyānam āha ---brahmā caturmukho raktaś caturbāhuvibhūṣitaḥ |
kṛṣṇājinottarīyaś ca rājīvāsanasaṁsthitaḥ || 74 ||
kamaṇḍaludharo devi daṇḍahastas tathaiva ca |
akṣamālādharo devaḥ padmahastaḥ sulocanaḥ |l 75 |l
dhyātvā patreṣu taṁ nyasyet sarvakilviṣanāśanam |
‘Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Hara are considered to be the lords within the
circle.” (73cd)

TANTRĀLOKA

(Now he teaches) their visualization, in terms of (both) the supreme and

inferior pervasion:

‘Brahmā has four faces. He is red and is adorned with four arms. He
wears a cloak of black antelope and is seated on a lotus seat. O goddess, his eyes
are beautiful and he holds a waterpot and staff, rosary and lotus. Having
visualized (him thus,) place him, the destroyer of all sin, amongst the petals (of
the lotus).” (74-76ab)

atasīpuṣpasaṅkāśaṁ śaṅkhacakragadādharam || 76 ||

pītāmbaradharaṁ devaṁ vanamālāvibhūṣitam |
sphuranmukuṭamāṇikyaṁ kiṅkiṇījālamaṇḍitam || 77 |I
divyakuṇḍaladhartāraṁ garuḍāsanasaṁsthitam |
dhyātvā viṣṇuṁ mahātmānaṁ keśareṣu niveśayet || 78 I|
‘(Dark blue) like an atasī flower, holding a conch, wheel and mace, the

god wears yellow clothes and is adorned with a garland of (flowers). The jewels
of his crown shine and he is adorned with a net of small bells. He wears forest
(flowers as his) divine earrings and sits on Garuḍa as his seat. Having visualized
Viṣṇu (in this way) place (that) great soul amongst the stamens (of the lotus).”

(76cd-78)

Śśaṅkhena padmamupalakṣyate | mānameyayor lolībhāvān meyātmani somamanṇḍale sṛṣṭipradhāne ‘pi sthitikārī viṣṇuḥ, sthityātmani ca pramāṇarūpe
sūryamaṇḍale sṛṣṭikartā brahmādhiṣṭhātā, iti yujyate evaitat I| 78 ||
The lotus (Viṣṇu holds, but is not mentioned here,) is indicated
implicitly by (the mention of) the conch. Viṣṇu, the agent of stability, is present
in the Circle of the Moon, which is the object of knowledge, although it is
predominately (the sphere of) emanation, because the means and object of

knowledge are intimately connected (lolībhāvāt). Again, (similarly) Brahmā, the
agent of emanation, is the presiding authority (adhiṣṭhātṛ) within the Circle of

the Sun, which is (the sphere of) stability and its nature the means of
knowledge. This makes sense.
śaṅkhakundendudhavalaṁ śūlahastaṁ trilocanam |
daśabāhuṁ viśālākṣaṁ nāgayajñopavītinam || 9 |l
sīṁhacarmaparĩdhãnaṁ śaśāṅkakrtabhũṣaṇam |
nīlakaṇṭhaṁ vrṣārūdhaṁ rudraṁ dhyātvā varānane || 80 |l
niveśayet karṇikāyāṁ mahāpātakanāśanam |
taduparĩ ---mahāpretaṁ nyaset paścāt prahasantaṁ sacetanam || 81 ||
raktavarṇaṁ sutejaskaṁ netratrayavibhūṣitam |
‘White like a conch, Kunda flower and the moon, he holds a trident and
has three eyes; His eyes are large, and he has ten arms and wears a serpent as a
sacred thread. He wears a lion-skin cloak and has made the moon his ornament.
His throat is blue, and he sits on a bull. Having visualized Rudra (in this way),

APPENDIX D

O fair-faced one, place him, the destroyer of great sins, in the calix (of the
lotus). (79-81ab)

Above it:

‘After that, place the Great Ghost, sentient and laughing (on the lotus).
He is red, beautifully powerful (surejaska) and adorned with three eyes.” (81cd82ab)
prakarṣeṇa .itaḥ sphutṭed antānīmajjanena ahantāpradhānāṁ sthitim
anupraviṣṭaḥ; prakarṣeṇa ca itaṁ gataṁ saṁbaddhaṁ viśvaṁ yasya iti
vyutpattyā preta iha sadāśivaḥ, sa ca mahad iti padena anāśritaśivarūpaḥ |
paramaśiva eva ca bhagavān ekaś cidrūpas tadadhararūpavarīī, ity anāśritādis
tadekajīvitaḥ, svayaṁ tu preta iva pretaḥ, adharādhvano ‘tra stimitatvenāvasthānāc ca pretaḥ,
(Kṣemarāja now presents a didactic etymology of the name
‘mahāpretaā’ — the Great Ghost). The one who has gone forth (itah) becomes
manifest (sphuṭet) as more excellent (prakarṣeṇa) (than others) (= pretah). (In
other words,) he has entered into the abiding state (sthiti) that is predominantly
subjectivity (ahantā) by merging inwardly (into consciousness). Now, according
to the following didactic etymology, the Ghost (preta) is Sadāśiva. (He is also
called preta because) his universe has become (ita) excellently (prakarṣena)

well-bound (within consciousness). According to this etymology, the Ghost —
preta — here is Sadāśiva. Moreover, he is ‘great’. (This) word (implies that he is
transcendent and so) never enters (creation) (anāśrita). He is the Supreme Śiva
Himself, the one God (bhagavat) who is consciousness, who is present in the
foundation of that (universe). Thus, His own life is as transcendent Śiva
(anāśrita) etc. and having by Himself (spontaneously) seemingly gone forth —
preta — He is preta, the ‘Ghost’. He is (also) the Ghost whose lower path (back
into the world) has been blocked, and (that is His) abiding state.

sa ca aparayā vyāptyā sthūlaḥ sadāśivaḥ, madhyamayā sa eva nādarūpaḥ,
parayã tu anãśritaḥ, iti tadanusãreṇa sũṁhãsanaṁ padmaṁ ca yojyam | ṣa ca
pretaḥ paramaśivo
‘hantānupraveśād eva prahasan nādāmarśarūpo
mahāvikāsamayaś ca, tenaiva paramaśivena nādātmanā sacetanaḥ | evam api
tāvanmātredantonmeṣātmako-pādhirūpatvāt viśvānurañjakatvāc ca raktavarṇaḥ, bodhaprādhānyāt sutejaskaḥ | vakṣyati ca ---- sūryakoṭiṣamaprabham |
iti bhauvane paṭale |
And He is, by a lower form of pervasion, the gross Sadāśiva. By the
middling one he is Sound, and by the supreme one Anāśrita. One should add the
lotus throne accordingly. Again, that ghost is, by entering into subjectivity
(ahantā), Supreme Śiva, who is ‘laughingʼ. (His laughter) is (his) contemplation
of Sound and is also the Great Expansion (mahāvikāsa). By virtue of that same
Paramaśiva, Who is Sound, (this ghost is) sentient (sacetana).
His colour is red because the limiting adjuncts (that condition his
consciousness) in this way are the unfolding of objectivity that takes place to
this degree. (He is red) also because (he) colours the universe (red) with desire.

TANTRĀLOKA

As awakened consciousness predominates (in him he is said to be) ‘beautifully
powerfulʼ. (As is said) in the chapter (concerning) the worlds: “His light is that
of millions of suns.” (SvT 10/1214)
icchājñānakriyāśaktyātmanā
ca
eṣaṇīyajñeyakāryātma

nayatā
netratritayena ūrdhvadṛśā viśeṣeṇa bhūṣitaṁ rājamānam | yathoktam ---tisro devyo yadā cainaṁ nityam evābhyupāsate |
tryambakas tu tadā jñeyā.…........... || iti || 81 ||
evam iyat paryantam
He impels the universe, which is the object of will, knowledge and
action, with (his) three eyes, that are the energies of will, knowledge and action.
He is especially adorned and shines beautifully with his (upper eye that) looks
upwards. As is said: “if one worships him constantly as (the god with) three
goddesses, he should then be known to Tryambaka. I| 81 II
It is thus this much at the end.
praṇavena nyaset sarvam āsanaṁ bhairavasya tu || 82 ||
oṁ āsanāya namaḥ iti mantreṇa | etat sarvam āsanaṁ cidbhairavābhedena

vyāptaṁ .sarvaṁ .Śivamayam .iti vakṣyamāṇatvāt Sśaktirūpam,
vyatiriktāpararūpaṁ praṇavāntargarbhīkāreṇa nyaset | atra ca ----

na

.tu

āsanaṁ vibhajenmantrī kramaśaḥ padmamudrayā |
iti Śrṛīraurava uktatvāt karadvayaṁ mukulīkṛtya padmamudrāsphālanīyā
sthāpanīyā || 82 ||
‘Praṇava should be deposited on all of Bhairava’s throne.” (82cd)
(This is done with) the mantra ‘oṁ āsanāya namaḥ’. All this throne is
pervaded with its oneness with the Bhairava of Consciousness (cidbhairava). As

will be said, ‘everything is made of Śiva’; thus, (its) nature is (also) Śakti. One
should not deposit something else of another separate nature (by depositing) the
Praṇava that contains (everything within itself). Here (with regards to this), it is
said in the venerable Rauravāgama: ʻthe reciter of mantra should divide up the
throne gradually with the lotus seal (padmamudrā).” Thus, having gathered
together the fingers of the two hands, the lotus seal should be spread open and
installed.
gandhaiḥ puṣpaiḥ samabhyarcya..…-..…_ praṇavenaiva |
...…-..tato mūrtiṁ prakalpayet |
kadambakuṣumākārāṁ tuṣārakiraṇatviṣam || 83 ||
prakāśāhlādamayīmityarthaḥ || 83 ||
atha ---miūrtyūrdhve bhairavaṁ devaṁ sakalaṁ parikalpayet |
dvātriṁśadvarṇakhacitaṁ sphurattaḍidivojjvalam || 84 ||

APPENDIX D

‘Having worshipped with scents and flowers . . .” (2/83a) with Praṇava

alone, ‘one should then conceive the iconic form (of the deity) to be in the form
of a kadamba flower, shining with rays (white as) snow.” (2/83bcd)

(That is) made of the joy of the light (of consciousness).
‘Above the iconic form (of the Great Ghost) one should conceive the

differentiated (sakala) (iconic form of) the god Bhairava, shining with the

thirty-two syllables (of his mantra), burning (brightly) like a lightning flashing.

Appendix E
The Mantras of the Trident according to the Maaliniivijayottara
Having observed the structure of the Lotus Throne on which Sadāśiva,

the Great Ghost serves as the seat of Svacchandabhairava. We turn to the
formation of the Trident Throne taught in the Mālinīvijayottara (8/55-84ab) as
the Inner Sacrifice and presented by Abhinava in TĀ 15/15/297cd-365

B;- SṀ

FṀ---p̄Š---ḸZ7

ṄT.a

s.=

(

)
g˚ .)

N

7 >

APPENDIX E

The Mantras of the Shaft of the Trident
1) OṀ HRĪṀ ĀDHĀRAŚAKTAYE NAMAḤ (the Foundation)
2) OM KṢḶĀM DHĀRĀYAI NAMAḤ (Earth)
OMṀ KṢVĪṀ SURODĀYA NAMAḤ (Water — the Ocean of Wine)
OM VAṀ POTĀYA NAMAḤ (Fire — the Boat)
OM KṢAṀ KANDĀYA NAMAḤ (Air — the Bulb)

3) OM HAṀ ANANTĀYA NAMAḤ.
4) The Knot of Māyā

The eight qualities of the mind at the level of Māyātattva:


OṀ YAṀ DHARMĀYA NAMAḤ (SE) (Dharma)

OM RAṀ JÑĀNĀYA NAMAḤ (SW) (Jñāna (knowledge))

OM LAṀ VAIRĀGYĀYA NAMAḤ (NW) (Vairāgya (dispassion))

OM VAM AISVĀRYĀYA NAMAḤ (NE) (Aiśvārya (mastery))
OM ṛM ADHARMĀYA NAMAḤ (E) (Adharma)

OM ṚṂ AJÑĀNĀYA NAMAḤ (Ś) (Ajñāna (ignorance))
OM IM AVAIRĀGYĀYA NAMAḤ (W) (Avairāgya (lack of dispassion))

OM ḶM ANAIŚVARYĀYA NAMAḤ (N) (Anaiśvārya (lack of mastery))
5) The Plinth, the Lotus and the Corpse

OṀ OM VIDYATATTVĀYA NAMAḤ (Plinth. Vidyā (power of limited

knowledge)
OM AUM ADHASCHADANĀYA NAMAḤ (Lower covering. Māyā)
OM HAḤ ŪRDHVACHADANĀYA NAMAḤ (Upper covering (power of
limited agency))

6) The Lotus of Knowledge:
KAṂ, KHAṀ, GAM (Ē) GHAṀ, ṄAMṀ, CAM (SE)
CHAM, JAM, IHAM (S) ṄAM, TAṀ, THAM (SW)
ḌAṂṀ, ḌHAṂ, ṆAM (W) TAM, THAM, DAM (NW)
DHAṀ, NAṀ, PAṀ (N) PHAṂṀ, BAṀ, BHAM (NĒ)
OṀ HAṀ VĀMÃYAI NAMAḤ (Ē)

OMṀ HĀṀ JYEṢṬHĀYAI NAMAḤ (SE)
OM HIM RAUDRYAI NAMAḤ (S)

OM HIMṀ KĀLYAI NAMAḤ (SW)

OM HUM KALAVIKARAṆYAI NAMAḤ (W)
OM HŪṂM BALAVIKARAṆYAI NAMAḤ (NW)
OM HEM BALAPRAMATHANYAI NAMAḤ (N)
OM HAIṀ DAMANYAI NAMAḤ (NE)
OM HOM MANONMANYAI NAMAḤ (centre)

TĀNTRĀLOKA


The mantras of the parts of the lotus:


Petals - Śun: OM ŚAṀ SŪRYAMAṆḌALĀYA NAMAḤ

OM SAṀ SŪRYAMAṆḌALĀDHIPATAYE BRAHMAṆE NAMAḤ

Stamens — Moon: OMṀ SAṀ SOMAMAṆḌALĀYA NAMAḤ

OM SAṀ SOMAMAṆḌALĀDHIPATAYE VIṢṆAVE NAMAḤ
Calyx — Fire: OM SAṀ AGNIMAṆḌALĀYA NAMAḤ
OṀ SAṀ AGNIMAṆḌALĀDHIPATAYE RUDRĀYA NAMAḤ

OṀ AṀ VIDYĒŚVAREBHYO NAMAḤ
OM AḤ ĪSVARATATTVĀYA NAMAḤ

7)

The Cavity of Brahmā (brahmarandhra) at the top of the head.


At the base of the trifurcation Mahāpreta:


OṀ KṢMAṀ MAHĀPRETĀSANĀYA NAMAḤ
8) Tips of the prongs of the Trident:
OM JRAṀ SŪLAŚṚṆGEBHYO NAMAḤ
The Abbreviated Rite


From the energy at the base, up to the prongs of the Trident:


OM HRĪṂ JRAM ĀSANAPAKṢÁĀYA NAMAḤ.

9) Trividyā. At the level of the Upper End of the Twelve.

The Three Bhairavas
1) Bhairavasadbhāva (the Bhairava of Parā): JHKṢHŪM
The Limbs of Bhairavasadbhāva
OM JHKṢHĀṀ HṚDAYĀYA NAMAḤ
OM JHKṢHIṂ ŚIRASE SVÁĀHĀ

OMṀ JHKṢHŪṀ ŚIKHĀYAI VAUṢATṬ
OM JHKṢHAIṀ KAVACĀYA HUM

OMṀ JHKṢHAUṀ NETRĀYA VAṢATṬ
OM JHKṢHAḤ ASTRĀYA PHAṬ
The Faces of Bhairavasadbhāva

OMṀ JHKṢHAṀ ŪRDHVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (Upper)

OM JHKṢHIṀ PŪRVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (East)
OM JHKṢHUṂ DAKṢIṆAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (South)
OM JHKṢHEṀ UTTARAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (North)
OMṀ JHKṢHOṀ PAŚCIMAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (West)

APPENDIX E

Unlike Ratīśekhara and Navātman, Abhinava does not supply
instructions for the formation of the limbs and faces of Bhairavasadbhāva.
However, he does supply two models. As the mantra of Ratiśekhara is short, and
so cannot be split up, his limbs and faces are formed from the vowels added
directly to the consonant base. Navātman is longer and so it is possible to split
up the base into single consonants and inflect them systematically by the

addition of the vowels. This is not possible with Bhairavasadbhava, as it is not

with Ratiśekhara. As the formation of the latter is given by Abhinava and he is
silent as to the former, one may presume that he meant us to understand that the
model for both is the same.

2) Ratiśekhara (the Bhairava of Parāparā): RYLVŪṀ
The Limbs of Ratiśekhara

OṀ RYLVĀṀ HṚDAYĀYA NAMAḤ
OṀ RYLVŪṀ ŚIRASE SVĀHĀ
OM RYLVIṀ ŚIKHĀYAI VAUṢAT

OṀ RYLVAIṀ KAVACĀYA HUM

OṀ RYLVAUMṀ NETRĀYA VAṢAT
OM RYLVAḤ ASTRĀYA PHAṬ
The Faces of Ratiśekhara

OM RYLVAṀ ŪRDHVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (Upper)

OṀ RYLVIṀ PŪRVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (East)

OM RYLVUM DAKṢIṆAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (South)
OM RYLVEM UTTARAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (North)
OṀ RYLVOṀ PAŚCIMAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (West)
3) Navātman (the Bhairava of Aparā): RHRKṢMLVYŪM
The Limbs of Navātman
%k%6W6 % %eWo % %eW% % %% %6 W% % Ã%ē

These are derived from the first six consonants of Navātman that is, R
H R KṢ M L. Inflecting with the long vowels for the limbs and the short for the
faces, as normal, we get:

OṀ RĀṀ HṚDAYĀYA NAMAḤ
OMṀ HIṀ ŚIRASE SVĀHĀ
OṀ RŪM SIKHĀYAI VAUṢAT
OṀ KṢAIṀ KAVACĀYA HUM
OM MAUM NETRĀYA VAṢAT
OMṀ LAḤ ASTRĀYA PHAṬ

See TĀ 30/116ab.

TANTRĀḶLOKA

The Faces of Navātman

OM KṢAṀ ŪRDHVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (Upper)
OM YIM PUŪRVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (East)
OM RUM DAKṢIṆAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (South)
OM VEM UTTARAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (North)
OM LOM PASCIMAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (West)
The Three Vidyās

Parā Vidyā
SAUḤ
SAUḤ is the supreme Heart of Parā. Abhinava reports that there are
several variants or this monosyllabic Vidyā. He cites SHAUḤ and HSAUḤ as
examples. Another variant is SHSUAUHḤ which is in six parts corresponding to
six configurations of energies (cakra) in the subtle body. Another, very

different, Vidyā of Parā is HRĪḤ. Theṣe and other monosyllabic mantras (bīja)

are used in secret Kaula rituals of various schools, not just Trika. It is the fifth of
the Five Brahmās according to the system of Mantras in the Kubjikā Tantras.
There we find HSAUḤ, HSVAUḤ, HSVŪAUḤ and oṭhers. One gets the
impression that the large number of variants may be derived, in part at least,

from the uncertainty of the pronounciation of SAUḤ. The variant forms in the

Kubjikā Tantras are also probably a way of distancing its system from that of

Trika to which it is very closely related.
The Limbs of Parā

The Faces and Limbs of Parā Vidyā are formed on the same model as
the others recorded here. In this case the base is S to which long vowels are
added for the Limbs and short ones for the goddess’s five Faces.

OMṀ SĀṀ HṚDAYĀYA NAMAḤ

OM SĪMṀ ŚIRASE SVĀHĀ

OM SŪMṀ ŚIKHĀYAI VAUṢAT.

OM SAIṀ KAVACĀYA HUM

OM SAUṀ NETRĀYA VAṢATṬ
OM SAḤ ASTRĀYA PHAṬ
The Faces of Parā

OM SAṀ ŪRDHVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (Upper)

OMṀ SIṀ PŪRVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (East)
OM SUM DAKṢIṆAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (South)
3Se MV 4/25, TĀ 16/172ab, 4/181cd-193 and 5/14145

APPENDIX E

OMṀ SEMṀ UTTARAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (North)
OM SOṀ PAŚCIMAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ) (West)
The Vidyāṅgas
The Vidyāṅgas are Mantra deities that are a part of Śiva's entourage.

They are the Heart, called Vidyādhipa, the Head, called Brahmaśiras, the

Topknot called Rudrāṇī, the Armour called Puruṣṭuta and the Weapon called
Pāśupatāstra. The Vidyā of which these are the limbs is Parā.

Vidyāṅgahrdaya (Vidyādhipa) (the Heart): OM OM OM OM OM
Brahmaśiras (the Head): OM AMṚTE TEIJOMĀLINI SVĀHĀ
Śikhā (Rudrāṇī) (the Topknot): OM VEDA VEDINI HŪM PHAT
Varman (Puruṣṭuta) (the Armour): OM VAJRIṆE VAJRADHARĀYA SVĀHĀ
Aṣṭra (Pāśupatāstra) (the Weapon): OM ŚLIṀ PĀŚU HUṀ PHAṬ

Parāparā Vidyā
OMṀ AGHORE HRĪḤ PARAMAGHORE HUṀ GHORARŪPE HAḤ
GHORAMUKHI BHĪMA BHĪṢAṆE VAMA PIBA HE RURU RARA PHAṬ

HUṀ HAḤ PHAṬ
Aghora,

Paramaghora,

Ghorarūpa,

Ghoramukha,

Bhīma,

Vamana and Pibana are an important Group of Eight Bhairavas.’ The names of

these Bhairavas were originally those of Rudras. These eight Bhairavas and

their female equivalents are regularly worshipped in the course of Trika ritual.
They are closely associated with Parāparā who is built up from the Vidyās of
their eight partners who bear their names in the feminine. They appear in the
Vidyā of Parāparā arranged in the same serial order as the Bhairava’s are listed.

They are:


Aghorī: OM AGHORE HRĪḤ

Paraṃghorī: PARAMGHORE HUM
Ghorarūpā: GHORARŪPE HAḤ
Ghoramukhīī GHORAMUKHI

The limbs may be six or five. When they are five normally the Eye (Netra) is omitted.
Siva’s Eye is the well-known Mantra of Mṛtyuñjaya, namely ŌṂ JUM SAḤ
as its mantra is a common Śaiva one
1 argue that that is the case above in note 15, 112.

See MV 3/560 and TĀ 16/213-216ab
See MV 1/19cd-21ab
“Bhīma’ is anomolous. The required vocative is bhīme. The form bhīmā is the
nominative and is not attested. If we read bhīmabhīṣane as one word the Sanskrit would

be correct. However, in that case the ancillary goddess Bhīmā would not be accounted

for. It appears that a mistake occured whereby bhīme was read as bhīma. This is quite an

understandable error. The vocative bhīmabhīṣaṇe — O terrible frightening one! May well

TANTRÃLŌKA

Vamanī: VAMA
Pibanī: PIBA HE RURU RARA PHATṬ HUṀ HAḤ PHATṬ
Aparā Vidyā

HṚRĪḤ HŪM PHAT
The Guardians of the Quarters
OM LĀṀ INDRĀYA NAMAḤ (East)
OM RIM AGNAYE NAMAḤ (South-East)
OM TUM YAMĀYA NAMAḤ (South)
OM KṢAIṀ NAIRTYAI NAMAḤ (South-West)
OM VAUM VARUṆAYA NAMAḤ (West)
OM YAḤ VĀYAVE NAMAḤ (North-West)
OM SUM KUBERĀYĀ NAMAḤ (North)
OṂ MAM IŚĀNĀYA NAMĀḤ (North-East)
OM AMṀ PRAJAPATAYAI NAMAḤ (above)
OM IM VIṢṆAVE NAMAḤ (below)
The Weapons of the Guardians of the Quarters

OM LAṀ VAJRĀYA NAMAḤ
OM RIM ŚAKTYAI NAMAḤ

OM TUṀ DAṆḌÁYA NAMAḤ
OM KṢEM KHAḌGĀYA NAMAḤ

OM VOṂ PĀŚĀYA NAMAḤ

OM YAṀ DHVAJĀYA NAMAḤ
OM SUM GADĀYAI NAMAḤ

OM MAṀṂ TRISULAYA NAMAḤ

OM AṀ PADMĀYA NAMAḤ
OM IM CAKRAYA NAMAḤ
Krama Vidyās
Mātṛsadbhāva
HSHRPHEṀ


The six limbs of Mātṛsadbhāva:


OMṀ HĀṀ HRṚDAYĀYA NAMAḤ
OM SĪṀ ŚIRASE SVĀHĀ

sound better than bhīme bhīṣaṇe and makes sense to someone who may not know that
eight parts of Vidyā correspond to the ancillary goddesses.
See TAv ad 30/25cd-26ab where Jayaratha quotes the SYM for the corresponding
deities of each letter of Parāparā

! See MV 8/39-43

APPENDIX E

OṀ HŪM ŚIKHĀYAI VAṢAT

OM RAIṀ KAVACÁYA HUM

OM PHAUM NETRAYAYA VAUṢAT
OM RAḤ ASTRAĀYA PHAT
The five faces of Mātṛsadbhāva

OM HOM ŪRDHVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ

OM SEM PURVAVAKTRAYA NAMAḤ
OM HUM DAKṢIṆAVAKTRAĀYA NAMAḤ

OM RIṀ UTTARAVAKTRĀYA
NAMAḤ

OM PHREṀ PAŚCIMAVAKTRAĀYA NAMAḤ
The Seed-syllable of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī
KHPHREṀ
The limbs
KHPHRĀM HṚDAYĀYA NAMAḤ
KHPHRĪM ŚIRASE SVĀHĀ
KHPHR̥ŪṂṀ ŚIKHAYAI VAUṢAT
KHPHRAIṀ KAVACĀYA HUM
KHPHRAUMṀ NETRAYĀYA VASAT
KHPHRAḤ ASTRAĀYA PHAT
The faces
KHPHRAM ŪRDHVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ
KHPHRIṀ PŪRVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ
KHPHRUṂ DAKṢIṆAVAKTRAYA NAMAḤ
KHPHREM UTTARAVAKTRAYA NAMAḤ
KHPHROMṂ PASCIMAVAKTRAYA NAMAḤ
The Nine-syllabled Kālakarṣiṇī Vidyā

KHPHR̥ÉḤṀ MAHĀCAṆḌAYOGEŚVARI
The seventeen-syllabled Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī Vidyā
HṚĪM (or KHPHR̥EM) MAHĀCAṈḌAYOGEŚVARI THṚ (M) DHRṚ (MṀ)
THR (M) PHAṬ PHAṬ PHAṬ PHAṬ PHATṬ
The Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī Samayavidyā of 100 syllables

KHPHR̥EṀ PHAṬ I MAHĀCAṆḌE CAṆḌAMUKHI CAṆḌAYOGEŚVARI

PHAT

CAṆḌADUḤKHAVIMOCANI
SARVASAMAYALOPAVIGHĀTANI TEJOVATI AMṚTAMŪRTE ASIDDHASĀDHANI SIDDHI-

TANTRĀLOKA

ṚDDHIPRADE

SARVADOṢĀN
ABHIMATAṀ
ME
PRAYACCHA SARVĒ SARVAGE ARŪPĒ SARVARŪPE HṚĪṀ PHAT |
KHPHREṀ PHAT | HŪM KROṀ KṢĀṀ SARVAVIDYEŚVARI PHAṬ
SVĀHĀ |
The Vidyās of Kālasaṅkarśiṇī
Abhinava rigorously avoids reference to the iconic forms of deities with
hardly one or two exceptions and that only in the case of the three Trika
Goddesses.' At a basic level he must have understood that if he presents the
iconic form of one deity, he would be obliged to present many others. Avoiding,
as he normally does, reference to the iconic form of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī who, de

facto is the supreme deity of Abhinava’s Anuttara Trika, he presents her, as
does the Devyāyāmala, as the Supreme Goddess - Parā who consumes the vital
breath, and with it time, absorbing it into the Eternity of her essential nature as
absolute consciousness. He writes:

And so, it is said in the venerable Devyāyāmala in (the part of it) called

the Dāmarayāga (the Sacrifice of the Warlocks): ‘Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī (Attractress

of Time), who resides in the mouth and constantly generates (kalanī) inhalation
and exhalation draws (karṣati) the triple time at the tip of the nose into the Heart

by means of inhalations. By the retentions of the breath, she sustains (and
checks) it (dhatte) and by exhalation she consumes it. Ascending by exhalation
(within suṣumnā) she devours time completely in an instant. The power of the

will (icchāśakti) that goes by the name of Parā awakens the three energies (of
will, knowledge and action). Worthy of worship, she draws all the vital breath,

which is the foundation of time, (into herself).

In the above citation Abhinava is paraphrasing three passages from the
Devyyāyāmala quoted by Jayaratha in the commentary as follows.

As is said there (in the Devyāyāmala):

“This, the gross time that moves along the two paths (of exhalation and

inhalation), is for yogis adorned with the three energies (of knowledge, action

and the will) on the right, left and middle (currents of the breath, respectively).
She who is Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī consumes the three kinds of time in this way.
(The goddess) who goes by the name Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, generating

inhalation and exhalation, is time which is located in the cavity of the mouth. It
is drawn into the Heart by inhalation and is sustained on both sides (samantāt)

by retention. Arisen by exhalation the goddess consumes time in an instant.

'" See TĀ >>>>
This is Abhinava’s favorite section of this, unfortunately, unrecovered Tantra. He has

already quoted from it (see above, 3/67cd-70) and tells us further ahead that his teacher
Śambhunātha has initiated him in the rite of the Mahāyāga it teaches (15/351cd-352ab).
He provides the nine syllabled Vidyā of Kālasaṁkarṣinī taught there below in 30/54-

55ab.

TĀ 15/335cd-338

APPENDIX E

The power of the will that goes by the name of Parā awakens the three
energies. Worthy of worship she draws (into herself) all the wind (of the vital

breath) which is the foundation of time.”

Abhinava does not avoid the presentation of mantras, as he does iconic
forms. He even goes so far as to argue that it is in certain circumstances
permissible to acquire them from books, which is contrary to the basic norm that
mantras should be learnt from a teacher, or at least, the most basic ones.
Abhinava is happy to do that up to a point. He presents Trika mantras, conscious
that they are not in the pblic domain. But he draws the line with Krama mantras,
apart from the fundamental seed-syllable of the Goddess, that is, KHPHREM.
The rest he keeps secret. Jayaratha helps us by quoting the Devyāyāmala’s

presentation of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī’s seventeen syllable Vidyā in the Mālinī code."

The ones given here below are drawn from a a liturgical work called the
Kālikākulapañcakramakramārcana compilled by a certain Vimalaprabodha

probably around the 11 century." It is the only liturgical manual that has been

recovered that teaches the ritual worship of the Pañcayāha which is the core of
the teachings of the most developed form of the Krama system. It is recorded in
the three texts called Mahānayaprakāśa as processes of the configurations of
energies of cognitive consciousness. There we find the following Vidyās of

Piṇḍanātha Saṁhārabīja

KHPHR̥EṀ / MA-E-KHA-PHA-RAMṀ
The Nine syllable Vidyā
KHPHREṀ MAHĀCAṆḌAYOGEŚVARI
The Seventeen syllable Vidyā

HRĪṀ / KHPHREṀ' MAHĀCAṆṈḌAYOGEŚVARI ṬHṚ DHṚ ṬHṚ PHAT
PHAT PHAT PHAT PHATṬ
ayaṁ pathadvaye kālaḥ sthūlaś carati yoginām |

savyāpasavye madhye ca śaktitrayavibhūṣitaḥ ||

sā graset trividhaṁ kālaṁ kālasaṅkarṣiṇī tathā | iti
kālasaṅkarṣiṇīnāmnā kālaṁ mukhabile sthitam |

śvāsanīḥśvāsakalanī tasya saṅkarṣaṇaṁ hṛdi ||
pūrakeṇa samantāt tu kumbhakena ca dhārayet |
recakenotthitā devī kālaṁ saṁgrasate kṣaṇāt l| iti
icchāśaktiḥ parānāmnā śaktitritayabodhinī |
yājyā karṣayate sarvaṁ kālādhāraprabhañjanam 1|

See TĀv 29/69-70ab.

The final last colophon reads: iti śrīparamahaṁsaparivrājakācārya śrivimalaprabodhapādaviracita kālikākulapañcakramakramārcanaṁ samāptam ||
' Śee bibliography for the details of the two surviving manuscripts.

' According to the Dāmaramahāyāga.
'V This Vidyā is drawn from a passage in the Devyāyāmala quoted in TĀv 29.

According to Sanderson: ‘the norms for the formation of Ancillaries require us to

TANTRĀLOKA

The Seventeen syllable Vidyā

KHPHREṀ PHĀṀ PHĪṀ MAHĀCAṆḌAYOGEŚVARI KĀLAKĀLI HŪṀ
PHAṬ

The Seventeen syllable Vidyā

MA-E-KHA-PHA-RA-MA-HĀ-CA-ṈA-ḌA-YA-O-GA-E-ŚA-VA-RI

The Hundred syllable Samayavidyā
KHPHREṀ PHAṬ |I MAHĀCAṆḌE CAṆḌAMUKHI CAṆḌAYOGEŚVARI
PHAṬ.

CAṆḌADUḤKHAVIMOCANI
SARVASAṀMAYALOPAVIGHĀTANI TEJOVATI (TEJOMAYI) AMṂṚTAMŪRTE ASIDDHASADHANI SIDDHIRDDHIPRADE NĀŚAYA SARVADOṢĀN . ABHIMATAṀ ME PRAYACCHA SARVE SARVAGE ARUPE SÁRVARUPE
HRĪṂ PHAT | KHPHREM PHAT | HŪM KṚROṀ KṢĀṀ SARVAVIDYESVARI PHAṬ SVĀHĀ |

armrmrmrmrmrmrmrmrmaaṛa aHH---——mHii--AHAunderstand. (1) that the anusṣvāraḥ should be added not only after the Ā of the Heart but

after all except the Weapon, which ending in H. does not receive this closure, and
that the prescription of the opening consonant cluster KHPHR should be applied
throughout. Thus, we have the following:
KHPHRĀṀ HṚDAYĀYA NAMAḤ

KHPHRĪṂṀ ŚIRASE SVĀHĀ

KHPHR̥ŪṀ ŚIKHAYAI VAUṢAT

KHPHRAIṀ KAVACĀYA HUṀ

KHPHRAUṀ NETRAYĀYA VAṢAT
KHPHRAḤ ASTRĀYA PHAT
This creates an implausible anomaly, since it is normal practice to form the

ancillaries from the seed-syllable of the main mantra by substtuting the six sounds ĀṀ,

ĪṀ, ŪṀ, AIṀ, AUṀ, and AḤ for the vowel of that syllable. Since the main mantra has
been given as OM HRĪṀ MAHĀCAṆḌAYOGEŚVARI PHAT, that is to say, with
HRĪM as its seed syllable, those of the ancillaries should have been HRĀṀ, HRĪṀ,
HRŪM, HRAIṀ, HRAUM, and HRAH. From the fact that the section on the ancillaries

has them begin with KHPHR rather than HṚ we may infer that it is highly probable that

the author who composed this section had as his main Mantra not OṀ HRĪṀ

MAHĀCAṈḌAYOGEŚVARI PHAT, but OṀ KHPHREM MAHĀCANṆḌAYOGESVARI PHAṬ which conforms to the practice of the Kālīkula, and therefore that

the substitution of HRIM may be the result either of a conscious modification that was
not carried through to the form of the ancillaries, or, perhaps, of a scribal error.

Appendix F

Concerning Mantras
The Initiatory Mantra
It seems that right from the earliest developments of the Śaivāgamas,
particularly the Bhairava Tantras, the circles of initiates were so small that their
traditions were constantly in danger of being lost. It was not easy to find
qualified teachers. The Brahmayāmala and other scriptures sought to remedy
this problem by allowed for the possibility of self-initiation. Not at all normally
accepted, in this special case the initiation does take place simply by the
utterance of the root mantra. Abhinava explains that
‘this is because the goddess Raktā (Herself) gradually initiates him (as
he) repeatedly recitates (Her) Mantra. If (the aspirant) cannot find a master such

as has been described he should practice this means (vidhi) (and initiate himself

directly). (The Lord) has said in the (Śiddhayogeśvaī) Mata that the study of
Mantras from a book is (generally) attended by the same defect (that is, they
lack the effulgence of consciousness). Thus, in the absence of this defect,
(learning Mantras from books) is not prohibited.

According to Jayaratha, the goddess Raktā is Durgā, but this is clearly
wrong as Durgā is not worshipped significantly in the rituals of the
Brahmayāmala. The main deity worshipped there is Kapālīśa Bhairava along

with eight goddesses, also called Yoginīs, that issue from his body. His Mantra
is actually a Vidyā, as it invokes his consort, Caṇḍākāpālinī, not him. It is:

The nine syllables of the Vidyā are presided over by the nine deities
who are the main object of daily worship. These are Kapālīśa Bhairava ((OM)
HŪM), his four goddesses who are arranged around him in the four directions:
Raktā (east) (CAMṀ), Karālā (south) (DE), Caṇḍākṣī (west) (KĀ) and

Mahocchuṣmā (north) (PĀ) and their four attendant powers (dūtī) - Karālī

(south-east) (LI), Danturā (south-west) (NI), Bhīmavaktrā (north-west) (SVĀ)
and Mahābalā (north-east) (HĀ). These four are hardly more than embodiments
of epithets that describe the four main goddesses. It is common practice that the
first in a series stands for all the rest. Thus, Raktā, stands for all the others.

' TĀ 4/65-66; cf. TĀ 16/21-24ab.

pūrvapatre [k: sīrva-] nyased raktāṁ praṇavāsanapāūrvakām [. . .]

anenaiva vibhāgena dakṣiṇāre karālinī [k: -de karālin] |
paścime [k: -maṁ] caiva candākṣī mahocchuṣmā [kh: -chuṣmā; k: -chuṣmāṅ] tathottare ||
āgneye tu karalyākhyā [k: -lākhyā] natrṛte [k, kh: narrite] danturā [k: dantunāṁ] tathā |
vāyavye [k: -vya] bhīmavakīrā [k, kh: -vaktrān] tu īśāne [k: i-] tu mahābalā ||
pūrvakrameṇa vai devi yoginyo [k: -nyā] vinyased budhaḥ | BY 30/21ab, 23-25ab
These yoginīs appears throughtout the BY, but re.fer especially to chapters 29
and 30, where their maṇḍala is described.

TANTRĀLOKA

Accordingly, by the ‘worship of Raktā’” is meant the worship of all of them
which is done by reciting the Vidyā.
The Seven Common Mantras
Abhinava lists the basic mantras common to all schools of Śaivism as

follows in TA 22/20. The reader is referred to the notes there for an analysis.

1) OṂ, 2) Mātṛkā, 3) Māyā, 4) Vyomavyāpin (the Pervader of the Sky),
5) the six-syllabled Mantra, 6) Bahurūpa (the Pluriform), and 7) the one called
Netra (the Eye) — these are the seven (universal) common Mantras.

praṇavo mātṛkā māyā vyomavyāpī ṣaḍakṣaraḥ | ._
bahurũpo ʻtha netrākhyaḥ sapta sādhāraṇā amī || TĀ 22/20

Appendix G

CHAPTER EIGHT OF THE MĀLINĪVIJAYOTTARA,
--------------------------------------------------

The Initiation into the Rule (samaya)

CHAPTER EIGHT OF THE MĀLINĪVIJAYOTTARA IS DEDICATED TO TEACHING THE BASIC
--------------------------------------------------

regular Trika initiation (samayadīkṣā) upon which a good deal of Chapter
Fifteen of the Tantrāloka is based. It is very helpful to read this in order to
better understand what Abhinava is teaching and how he has adapted and
extended this procedure taught here. The procedure taught in this initiation
constitutes the substance of the regular ritual the Trika Saivite performs daily,
and so is at the very heart of the Trika practice of one who has chosen the path
of riṭual. The translation of the passages that are quoted by directly by Abhinava
are in bold characters. Passages quoted by Jayaratha in relation to Abhinava’s
exposition are in italics. Their location in the Tantrāloka and the commentary
are in the notes. Referring back to those places, the interested reader can see
how Abhinava has understood these passages.

The Sacrifice

athātaḥ saṁpravakṣyāmi yajanaṁ sarvakāmadam !
yasya darśanamātreṇa yoginīsaṁmato bhavet |l 1 ||
I will now talk about the sacrifice that bestows all that is desired, just by
seeing which one is honoured by the Yoginīs.
Selection of Place (sthānakalpana)

āī-dāīrāv=ā āqa- aafaan I| 3 |I
EEENI[keḻĀśEṭi-EhkEīḤ

tatrādau yāgasadanaṁ śubhakṣetre manoramam |
kārayedagnikuṇḍena vartulena samanvitam || 2 ||
pañcavīṁśatiparveṇa samantādardhanābhinā |
turyāṁśamekhalenāpi parvauṣṭhena suśobhinā || 3 ||
There (in that case), one must first of all select an abode for the sacrifice

which is pleasing and situated in an auspicious place. It should have a round

TANTRĀLOKA

sacrificial hearth for the fire (agnikuṇḍa) (measuring) twenty-five fingers all
around, a navel half (that size), a surrounding girdle a quarter (of that), and a

beautiful lip (2-3)

The Six Purifying Baths

-] fgafēġ vārāīgīq || ||l
tataḥ snātvā jitadvandvo bhāvasnānena mantravit |

tacca ṣaḍvidhamuddiṣṭaṁ bhasmasnānādyanukramāt || 4 ||
”Then, the knower of mantra who has conquered the opposites, should
bathe with the bath of mental states (bhāvasnāna), and that is taught as being of
six kinds, beginning with the bath in ashes, in due order.

bhasmaṣnāne mahāstreṇa bhasma saptābhimantritam |
In the bathing with ashes the ash is consecrated (abhimantrita) with the
great (mantra) of the Weapon seven times. (Śab)

rqārīa āārckṁīīzgārra II u ||

q īīṁ ṃoaa rēfzaī I| ē II
malasnānāya saṁhārakrameṇoddhūlayettanum | 5 ||
vidyāṅgaiḥ pañcabhiḥ paścācchiraḥ prabhṛti guṇṭhayet |

abhiṣekaṁ tu kurvīta mūlenaiva ṣaḍaṅginā || 6 |

1) In order to wash away dirt (malasnāna), he should cover the body
with (the ash) in the sequence of withdrawal (i.e., from the feet to the head) with
the five limbs of the Vidyā. Then he should envelop (the body with them) from
the head onwards (down to the feet) and sprinkle (himself with water) with the

root (mantra) and (its) six limbs. (Ścd-6)

See TĀ 15/388 f. and also ŚSP vol. 1 pp. 230 ff.

TĀ 15/49cd corresponds loosely to MV 8/5cd-6 (bath in ashes) and 15/48-51ab corresponds
loosely to MV 8/8-9ab (worshup of the sun). 15/56 corresponds to 8/1 lcd-12 (ablution with air).

Read -snāne for -snānaṁḥ.

k: yalenaiveti.

The various forms of bathing are described 1n TĀ 15/38cd-79, which partly draws from here.
MV 8/5cd-6 1s quoted in TĀv ad 15/49-51ab. According Jayaratha, the root Mantra is Parā.

APPENDIX G

āmaarā ftaī |

gq || ¢ ||
tato ‘vāsāḥ suvāsā vā hastau pādau ca dhāvayet |
ācamya mārjanaṁ kuryādvidyayā bhūrivarṇayā || 7 |I
nyāsaṁ kr̥tvā tu sāmānyamaghamarṣaṁ dvitīyayā |
upasthānaṁ ca mālinyā japeccaikākṣarāṁ parām || 8 II
Without clothes or (dressed) in fine clothes, (the officiant) should then

wash his hands and feet and, after having sipped water (ācamya), he should
wipe (the body clean) (mārjana) with a Vidyā of many letters. Having
performed the common deposition, prayed for purification (aghamarṣana) with
the second (Vidyā) and attended reverently (upasthāna) with Mālinī, he should
repeat (japet) the monosyllabic (Vidyā of) Parā. (7-8)

STFTSTT TITI J GTĪĪTHTHTT |

fatraTrTīttzā a- aaq fēēq aorī |
jalasnāne ‘pi cāstreṇa mṛdaṁ saptābhimantritām |
pūrvavattanumālabhya malasnānaṁ samācaret | 9 ||
vidhiṣṇānādikaṁ cātra pūrvavat kiṁtu vāriṇā |
2) Also, when bathing with water, the earth (used) is consecrated seven

times with the Weapon (astra). Then, having touched the body with it as before,
he should then perform the ablution (that removes) impurity (malasnāna). The
procedure, bathing and the rest is as before, but (done) with water. (9-10ab)

sādhāraṇavidhisnāto vidyātritayamantritam || 10 ||

toyaṁ vinikṣipenmūrdhni mantrasnānāya mantravit |
3) In order to (perform) the ablution with mantra, the knower of mantra
should (first) have bathed in accord with the common procedure, and should
(then) throw on (his head) water that has been consecrated with the three Vidyās
(of Parā, Parāparā and Aparā). (10cd-11ab)

MV 8/7cd-8 is quoted 1n the TĀv ad 15/53cd-55.
MV 8/9ab is quoted in TĀv ad 15/49-51ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

Taī āīṃṂga- aāraāe āāaṇa I| zg II

THGTĀTT-TTĀ T-BṀGTTGT TḠTÑ |

rajasā godhutenaiva vāyavyaṁ snānamācaret || 11 II
mahāstramuccaraṉ gaccheddhyānayuk padasaptakam |
tadeva punarāgacchedanusmṛtya parāparām || 12 |

4) He should perform the ablution with Air by means of the dust shaken

off (from the body of a) cow. Immersed in meditation and uttering the Great
Weapon, he should walk seven paces and then again return back for that same

(amount), recollecting (The Vidyā of) Parāparā. (11cd-12)

EḶIEEEEPIIECVÑEIĒEIḤEĒḤ

ll

varṣātapasamāyogāddivyo ‘pyevaṁvidho mataḥ |

kiṁtu tatra parāṁ mantrĩ sravantĩmamr̥taṁ smaret | 13 ||
5) The divine ablution, which is performed in conjunction with the rain
and the sun, is considered to be like this, only that there (in that case), the reciter
of mantra should (mentally) recollect (the Vidyā of) Parā as flowing forth
nectar.

3Tav gsH©ord & ̄Ū] ] G |

aṇṀ3 ōācāgcdzáaṁē 3 I| zx |l
astreṇāṅguṣṭhamūlāttu vahnimutthāpya nirdahet |
svatanuṁ plāvayetpaścātparayaivāmrṛtena tu || 14 |
6) Having aroused the fire from the root of the big toe with the Weapon,
he should thoroughly burn his own body (with it), and after that flood it with
nectar with that same Parā (Vidyā). (Such is the ablution with fire).
The Entry into the Abode of Worship

r̥ĀTī TTāTITN TR̥JTRTTṬATT |

sūryādau mantramādāya gacchedastramanusmaran |

taṁ; lo: kṛteti.
' MV 8/11cd-12 quoted TĀv ad 15/56.

APPENDIX G

Havīing taken up the mantra (previously projected onto) the Sun etc. he

should go (to the abode of worship), recollecting the (mantra of the) Weapon.
(15ab)

3qrīz-vdraāāvīz faVr=zṝrrTīās: || zu |I

qyy fāTātzarraī sōfczrwvīaz || z= |l
yāgaveśmāstrasaṁśuddhaṁ viśecchuciranākulaḥ || 15 ||
tatra dvãrapatīn pũūjya mahãstreṇābhimantritam |
puṣpaṁ vinikṣipeddhyātvā jvaladvighnapraśāntaye |l 16 ||
(After bathing) Unperturbed and pure, he should enter into the abode of
the sacrifice that has been purified with (the mantra of) the Weapon. Having
worshipped the Lords of the Door there, he should throw a burning flower
consecrated with (the mantra of) the Great Weapon, having meditated (on it) in

order to pacify the obstacles. (15cd-16)

āṛaiffq āāīsaī fēz āēkcdā TaTTI] |
yfaṁrrāc- afgaṣfaaiga I| z.s |

daśasvapi tato ʻstreṇa dikṣu saṁkalpya rakṣaṇam |
praviśedyāgasadanaṁ vahnivadvahniṣaṁyutam || 17 ||
pūrvāsyaḥ saumyavaktro vā viśeṣanyāsamārabheṭ |

tatrādāvastramantreṇa kālānalasamatviṣā || 1 8 ||

aṅguṣṭhāgrāttanuṁ dagdhāṁ sabāhyābhyantarāṁ smaret |
Then, after having mentally created a protective barrier (rakṣaṇa) in the

ten directions (around the site) with the Weapon, he should enter the abode of

the sacrifice that is burning like a fire facing east or facing north, and begin

the special deposition (of mantra). There, first of all, he should recollect that the

body is bumt inwardly and externally from the big toe (upwards) by the

Weapon mantra, its radiant lustre like the Fire of Time. (17-19ab)

'' MV 8/15ab quoted in TĀv ad 15/61.
' MV 8/16 is quoted in TĀv ad 4/251cd. The printed edition of the MV reads dvārapatīn pūjya

for dvārapatīn iṣṭvā.

k: samanvitā.

See TĀ 15/183cd-193.

' MV 8/18a is quoted in TĀv ad 15/191cd-193 and also ad 15/230cd-231ab.

' TĀ 15/233 is a paraphrase of MV 8/18cd-19ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

feērīarmṛvṝ azā7 aaaṁ has;I-g-7 || 2.< ||
ṛaī EES…EI hṬHṬCHTTTH] HEE. |

vikīryamāṇaṁ tadbhasma dhyātvā kavacavāyunā || 19 l|
Śivabindusamākāramātmānamanucintayet |
tato ʻsya yojayecchaktiṁ so ʻhamityaparājitaḥ || 20 ||

Once having visualized that the ash of that (body) is scattered by the

wind of the Armour, he should then think that the form of the Self is that of
Śiva’s Point (śivabindu), and should then conjoin (Śiva’s) unconquered' power,

which is SO ‘HAṂ, to it.' (19cd-20)

Navātman, Limbs and Faces

GTGṬĒĪ TGIII] zVSrēē ārīvēq_ || 2? ||

āvz aīṝgīaṜ arīggātaṅrṁarq II 22 II

ftārzzī=rxa -meṁkfarṣfaryfīr 1
ī firēazī Ṝfr āīcāē fī gga || 2= II
dtthzārzaīā Jīzzaaṁ: |

vidyāmāūrtiṅṁ tato dadhyānmantreṇānena śāṅkari |
daṇḍākrāntaṁ mahāprāṇaṁ daṇḍārūḍhaṁ sanābhikam || 21 ||
nitambaṁ tadadhastācca vāmastanamadhaḥ punaḥ |
kaṇṭhaṁ ca vãāmaśikharaṁ vāmamudrāvibhãṣitam || 22 ||
bindvaráhacandrakhaṁ nādaśaktibinduvibhūṣitam |

eṣa piṇḍavaro devi navātmaka iti śrutaḥ || 23 |
sarvasiddhikaraścāyaṁ sarahasyamudāhṛtaḥ |

He should then add the Vidyāmūrti by means of the (following)

Mantra. The great vital breath (H) preceded and followed (ākrānta) by the staff
(R), the navel (KS), the hip (M), the left breast (L), the neck (V), the left part of
the back (Y) adorned with ornament of the left (ear) (Ū) and (then) the Void of

the Point and the Half Moon adorned with Sound (nāda) and Śakti’s Point

” Śee 15/232cd-239ab. Read aparājitām for aparājitaḥ. Gnol (1999: 669 n 2) suggests the

reading om ham ity aparāyitām for so ham ity aparājitaḥ that is OM HĀMṀ for SO ‘HAṀ.
See TĀ 15/232cd-230ab. Read aparajitām for aparājitaḥ. Gnoli suggests possibly emending

śaktim so ‘ham to śaktim oṁ hamṃ.
Literally ‘the 1con of the Vidyā’. This is formed from Navātman — RHRKṢMLVYŪṀ.
Concerning this seed syllable Mantra, see TĀ 30/11cd-16ab

APPENDIX G

(šaktibindu). O goddess, this most excellent piṇḍa (mantra) is taught (in the

scriptures) (śruta) as the Ninefold One (i.e., Navātman). This, the producer of
all accomplishments, has been mentioned (here) secretly (sarahasyam). (21-

24ab)

aādāōattīa raiārgfaigfāa: I| 3+, II
JTḤṬĨ] āñcq̄TŪaāTTATGJITC: ṢFHT |
esa tryarṇojjhito ‘dhastāddīrghaiḥ ṣaḍbhiḥ svarairyutaḥ || 24 ||
saḍaṅgāni hṛdādīni jātibhedena kalpayet |
kṣayaravalabījaiśca dīptairbinduvibhūṣitaiḥ || 25 ||
vaktrāṇi kalpayetpūrvamūrdhvavaktrāditaḥ kramāt |
Omitting the last three (letters of Navātmā), one should fashion (its)

six limbs, that is, the Heart and the rest, with the six (letters) that follow,
conjoined with the six long vowels, along with the syllabic invocation (jāti)
(corresponding to each limb). ” The faces should be fashioned (kalpayet)

beginning with the upper face (i.e., Iśāna) in due order with the energized
seeds KS, Y, R, V, and L, decorated with the Point. (24cd-26ab)

rcāgfafatāzā# voraṁcxaāī aā Il 2= |

pratyaṅgavidhisiddhyarthaṁ lalāṭādiṣvatho nyaset |l 26 ||
In order to accomplish the procedure (successfully) for each limb, he

should now perform the deposition on the forehead etc. (26cd)

See TĀ 30/43cd-45ab. The jātis and corresponding limbs are as follows: heart

NAMAH, head

— SVĀHĀ, topknot - VAUṢAT, armour — HUM, eye —- VAṢAT and weapon - PHAT.
MV 9/24cd-25 is reworked in TĀ 30/15-16ab. The TĀ reads vaktrāṇy asya ca — ‘and its faces’

for jātibhedena — ‘along with the syllabic invocation (jāti) (corresponding to each limb)’.
Abhīnavagupta tells us that these five ‘energized seeds' are the five faces of Navātman. If we
follow the directions of this edition of the MV and place the jātis at the end of each limb, as they
are normally, we get:

Heart:: OM KṢĀṀ HṚDAYE NAMAḤ

Head: OM YIM ŚIRASE SVĀHĀ

Topknot: OM RŪM ŚIKHĀYAIḤ VAUṢAT

Armour: OM VAIM KAVACAYA HUM
Weapon: OM LAUM ASTRĀYA PHAT

But this is only five.

See abvgove note 15,524 for the faces and limbs of Navātman.

TANTRĀLOKA

ṣ~š ā azaī 3-s sviī̃ aÃ |l 2 l
. īāīg2 āīq d ōUg TSgA ṛ |

EÉṞBEeekETURETAR:ītezgEr

ēftrrār-cṭēveāúgfc-rar] 7 || 3< II

ar fīT<rāg aīī Tgr̥TIĀTJHTT |

IFFTKATRTRITTTĀT] ṬJHT |

a lalāṭe dvitīyaṁ ca vaktre saṁparikalpayet |

i-ī netradvaye dattvā u-ī karṇadvaye nyaset | 27 ||
rṝ Ṛ nāsāpute tadvat ḷ Ḷ gaṇḍadvaye tathā |

e ai adhorádhvadanteṣu o-aukārau tatho ‘ṣṭhayoḥ || 28 |I

aṁ Śikhāyāṁ visargeṇa jihvāṁ saṁparikalpayet |
dakṣiṇaskandhadordaṇḍakarāṅgulinakheṣu ca || 29 ||
kavargaṅṁ vinyased vāme tadvaccādyamanukramāt |
tatādyau pūrvavadvargau nitamborvādiṣu nyaset || 30 |l
pādyaṁ pārśvadvaye pṛṣṭhe jaṭhare hṛdyanukramāt |
tvagraktamāṁsamūtreṣu yavargaṁ parikalpayet || 31 ||
śādyamasthivasāśukraprāṇakūpeṣu pañcakam |

A should be imagined to be on the forehead and the second one (Ā) on

the mouth. Having placed I and I on the two eyes, one should deposit U and Ū
on the two ears. ṛ and Ṛ are on the nostrils. In the same way one should deposit
ḷ aṇd L on the two cheeks. E and AI are on the lower and upper teeth
(respectively). The letters O and AU are in the same way on the two lips. M is
on the topknot. The tongue should be fashioned with H.
One should deposit the gutturals on the right shoulder, arm, hand,
fingers and nails. In the same way, the palatals (should be deposited) in (the
same) order on the left (arm). The cerebrals and dentals should be deposited as
before (respectively on the right and left) hips, thighs (feet, toes and nails). The
labials are on the two sides (of the body), the back, stomach and heart, in due

order (respectively). One should imagine the semivowels (Y R, L and V) to be on
the skin, blood, meat and sinews (respectively). The (remaining) five

APPENDIX G

(phonemes) beginning with S (i.e., S, S, H and Kš) are on the bones, fat, sperm,

vital breath and the testicles (respectively). (27-32ab)

T--r̄ṁ āaī ēraī fdraāṁaīeāza: I| 32 |I
mūrtyaṅgāni tato dattvā śivamāvāhayedbudhaḥ || 32 ||
Having formed the limbs of the Icon (mmūrti) (mantra), the wise man

should then invoke Siva (to enter into it). (32cd)

Bhairavasadbhāva

aāīṁaũrr̥+zā̃ã: ãārafa;: fṀra: || 33 ||
T-=T: THĪ ṜI] ĪTT TRIĀ; |

prāṇopari nyasennābhiṁ tadūrdhve dakṣiṇāṅgulim ḷ
vāmakarṇaprameyotaḥ sarvasiddhipradaḥ śivaḥ || 33 I|
sadbhāvaḥ paramo hyeṣa bhairavasya mahātmanaḥ |
aṅgānyanena kāryāṇi pūrvavatṣvarabhedataḥ || 34 ||
The navel (KS) should be deposited above (i.e., before) the vital breath

(H), and above that the right finger (JH). (This is) Siva, the bestower of all

accomplishments, threaded through with the objectivity (prameyota) of the left

ear (U). This is the supreme essence (sadbhāva) of Bhairava, the great soul. The
limbs should be formed as before, in conjunction with the vowels. (33-34)

Śāmbhavanyāsa

=rsī gaagazgāī |

ftra: ṃrgg ṁea -ī: gatāīfaa: I| 3u, |l
mūrtiḥ sṛṣṭistritattvaṁ ca aṣṭau mūrtyaṅgasaṁyutāḥ |
śivaḥ sāṅgaśca ṣoḍhaiva nyāsaḥ saṁparikīrtitaḥ || 35 ||
The Icon (mūrti), emanation, the three principles, the eight,
conjoined to the limbs of the Icon, and Siva with his limbs — this is said to

be the sixfold deposition.

MV 8/27-32ab is quoted in TĀv ad 15/117-120, which is an abbreviated paraphrasis of it. Read

with
—koṣesṣu for ~kūpeṣu.

Jayaratha,

See TĀ 30/16cd-17ab, which is a reworking of MV 8/33-34ab. This is the mantra of

Bhairavasadbhāva, the consort of Parā. It is JHKṢHŪM.
3 MV 8/35b is quoted in TĀv ad 15/239cd-244ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

Śāktanyāsa

īfcīr || 2ē ||
īrtīṁ vaīTēāracdra7 aa-Ṁq |
āaaāāāvzēatrṭarar ṣī || ss ||

āīkaaaeārōfṁ aitāīTmga || 3c ||
asyopari tataḥ śāktaṁ kuryānnyāsaṁ yathā śrṛṇu |
mūrtau parāparāṁ nyasya tadvaktrāṇi ca mālinīm || 36 ||
parāditritayaṁ paścācchikhāhṛtpādagaṁ nyaset |
kavaktrakaṇṭhahṛnnābhiguḥhyorūpādagaṁ kramāt || 37 I|
aghoryādyaṣṭakaṁ nyasya vidyāṅgāni tu pūrvavat |
tatastvāvāhayecchaktiṁ sarvayoginamaskṛtām |l 38 II

One should then perform the deposition of energy (śākta) above it;
listen to how (that is done).”
Having first of all deposited Parāparā with (Her) faces (and limbs) onto

the Icon and (on emanation) Mālinī, he should then deposit the triad Parā and
the rest (of the three principles) onto the topknot, heart and feet, respectively.

Then having deposited (above the eight, Aghora and the rest, the eight
goddesses) beginning with Aghorī onto the head, face, throat, heart, navel,
genitals, thighs and feet, respectively (he should deposit) the five limbs of the
Vidyā (vidyāṅga) (above the corresponding limbs of the Icon) as before. Then

(finally, the officiant) should invoke (āvāhayer) (Śiva’s) power which is revered

by all yogis. (36-38)

Concernng all this, see TĀ 15/247-250ab. According to Śambhunātha’s interprtation (see TĀ

15/245cd-246), the translation of MV 8/35 would be as follows: ‘The deposition according to the

tradition is sixfold, consisting of mārti (= Navātman), emission (= Mātṛkā), the three principles,
the eight conjomed to the ‘icon’, Śiva (= Bhairavasadbhāva) and (by a sxth being) with his
hmbs.
MV 8/35-36ab is quoted n TĀ 15/247-248ab wath variants but without change of meaning. In

place of MV 8/3ścd śivaḥ sāigaś ca ṣodhaiva nyāsaḥ saṁprakīrttaḥ — and Śiva with his hmbs —

this is said to be the sixfold deposition’, TA 15/247cd reads: sivah sāṅgaś ca vijñeyo nyāsaḥ
soḍhā prakīrtitaḥ — one should (also) know Śiva with his limbs — ‘this 1s said to be the suxfold

deposition’. In place of M 8/36ab asyopari tataḥ śākaṁ kuryān nyāsaṁ yathā śrṇu — Śʻthen one

should then perform the deposition of energy above it; listen to how (that is done), TĀ 15/248ab

reads: asyopari tataḥ śāktaṁ nyāsaṁ kuryācca ṣaḍvidham —- one should then perform the sxfold
deposition of energy above it’ TĀ 15/239cd-246 explams these and related verses in the MV.

According to this view, the three principles are the three Bhairavas: Ṅavātman, Rauśekhara and
Bharravasadbhāva.

See TĀ 15/247-250ab

TĀ 5/248¢d-250 1s a close paraphrase of MV 8/36-38. MV 8/38cd reads tatas tv āvāhayec

chaktiṅ ṣarvayoginamaskr̥ām — ‘Then (finally, the officiant) should mmvoke (āvāhayer) (Śivas)

APPENDIX G

Maātṛsadbhāva

āfcrcra aṁīgfyftzī f= farzr I| 3< Il
āATÑTTJTATā āaHTGTTUIĪ-ārāī: |
-+-ā ftīaī. āaī ̄aa atad %ōṇ I| o ||

TAEĀHECIAIT GVIĀIĒEEZḤ

āī̄aīēT sī̄+c-st a g-nfcafzgaaīq || +e II

zzarhzaTarī] frcāāīā sāītzā |

qTTGTI TTNITFTṬḺTTĪ-T iifdāī || 2 ||
jīvaḥ prāṇaputāntasthaḥ kālānalasamadyutiḥ |
atidīptas tu vāmāṅghribhūṣito mirdhni bindunā || 39 ||
dakṣajānuyutaś cāyaṁ sarvamātrṛgaṇānvitaḥ |

anena prīṇitāḥ sarvā” dadate vāñchitaṁ phalam || 40 ||
sadbhāvaḥ paramo hyeṣa mātṚṇāṁ paripathyate |

tasmādenāṁ’ japenmantrī ya icchetsiddhimuttamām || 41 |I
rudraśaktisamāveśo nityamatra pratiṣṭhitaḥ |
yasmādeṣā parāśaktirbhedenānena kīrtitā || 42 ||
“The Living Being (S) within the capsule of (the two) Vital Breaths

(H), shining like the Fire of Time (R), the Left Foot (of the goddess) (PH),
intensely energized, its head adorned with the Point (M) and linked with

the Right Knee (E).” Accompanied by all the host of Mothers, this (mantra)

gives life to them all” and they bestow the fruit (one’s) desires. Iṝ is taught

that this is the supreme essence (sadbhāva) of the Mothers.® Therefore, the
officiant (mantrin) who aspires to the most excellent accomplishment must
repeatedly recite it. The penetration of Rudra’s power (rudraśaktisamāveśa)
aaaaakkṀÃvr-tttaśttcsaÃṀ-SĀ-ĀṈṈhhmmmmhēkvvacēeeea…a-s-sT-TṆṬṆTṈmṬHhÃvhnmān
power which is saluted by all yogis.' TĀ 15/250d reads instead ‘Then (finally, the officiant)
should invoke (āvāhayer) (Śiva’s) power) in the form of Mātrsadbhāva’.

! Variant reading: l00: arcita.
TĀ sarve.
TĀ bhairavaṣya ca.

Read with TĀ -naṃ for —nāṁ.

Variant reading: l00 anyeneri.
MV 8/39-43 is quoted as TĀ 30/47-51 with variants.
Thus, the Mantra is HSHRPHEM.
TĀ 30/48b reads sarvamātṛgaṇārcitaḥ `venerated by all the host of Mothers’ for MV 8/40b

sarvamātr̥gaṇānvitaḥ ʻaccompanied by all the host of Mothers’.
TA 30/48c reads ‘sarve’ for sarvā. The feminine in this reading refers to the Mothers.
TĀ 30/49b reads bhairavasya ca — and of Bhairava’ for MV 8/41b paripathyate — ‘it is taught’.
MV 8/41ab is quoted in TAv ad 3/68cd-70 (69-71ab) and 4/177-178ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

is always established here, for it is said to be the Supreme Power, in this

aspect. (39-42)

yāvatyaḥ siddhayastantre sarvāḥ syuranayā kṛtāḥ |

aṅgāni kalpayed asyāḥ pūrvavatsvarabhedataḥ || 43 |

As many as are the accomplishments (siddhi) (promised) in the

Tantra, all of them are generated by this (Vidyā). Her limbs should be formed
as before in conjunction with the vowels (as appropriate).

mūrtiḥ savaktrā śaktiśca vidyātritaya eva ca |

aghoryādyaṣṭakaṁ ceti tathā vidyāṅgapañcakam || 44 |
sāṅgā caiva parā śaktirnyāsaḥ prokto ‘tha ṣaḍvidhaḥ |

yāmalo ʻyamato nyāsaḥ sarvasiddhiprasiddhaye || 45 ||
Now, the deposition is said to be sixfold. (It consists of) the Icon (of
Mālinī) with its faces, power, the three Vidyās, the group of eight beginning
with Aghorī, the five limbs (of the Vidyā) and the supreme power with (her)
limbs. Thus, this double (yāmala) deposition (first male then female) serves to

atṭṭain all accomplishments (siddhi). (44-45)

! TĀ 30/50d reads bhedenānyena- ‘in another aspect for MV 8/42d bhedānena — ‘in this aspect’.
The reference here is to the sonic form of Parā, that is, SAUḤ. See above, TĀv on 29/21: ‘Here
with the word ‘Parā’ itself the author has referred (vyākṛta) to Mātr̥ṣadbhāva which is the highest
form of Parā Herself.’

“D TĀ and kh: puō tāḥ sarvāḥ kurute tviyam.
For MV 8/43b sarvāḥ syur anayā kr̥tāḥ ‘all of them are generated by this (Vidyā)’, TĀ 31/51b
reads tāh sarvāḥ kurute tv iyam — “this (Vidyā) generates them all.
See TĀ 3047-51 TĀ 30/5lcd reads aṅgavaktrāṇi cāpyasyāḥ prāgvatsvaraniyogataḥ —- her
limbs and faces are formed by applying the vowels in the same way as (explained) previously for
MV 8/43cd aṅgāni kalpayed asyāḥ pūrvavat ṣvarabhedataḥ — ‘her limbs should be formed as
before in conjunction with the vowels.’ For the limbs and faces of Mātrṛsadbhāva (HSHRPHREṀ)
see above, note 553.

“ k. anyathāpyamneti

See TĀ 15/254-255.

APPENDIX G

arṝī ara fafr. āīaiī gThāīrīīafsafĩ. |

vāmo vāyaṁ vidhiḥ kāryo muktimārgāvalambibhiḥ |
varṇamantravibhedena pṛthagvā tatphalārthibhiḥ || 46 ||

Those who take their support from the path to liberation should (first)

perform this procedure of the left (concerning Śakti).’ Or else those who do not

desire that fruit (should perform them) separately with (the correspondingly)
different mantras and phonemes.

EEP- iUIV-TṬ VTETEVEIEAH

=aaṛ: ũafṁāī ī || x ||

kEETE= |TĀ-CĒĒ

CĒ āṃ=aa || x¢ ||

yāvantaḥ kīrtitā bhedaiḥ śaṁbhuśaktyaṇuvācakāḥ |
tāvatṣyapyevamevāyaṁ nyāsaḥ pañcavidho mataḥ | 47 ||
kiṁtu bāhyastu yo yatra sa tatrāṅgasamanvitaḥ |
saṣṭhaḥ syāditi sarvatra ṣoḍhaivāyamudāhṛtaḥ || 48 ||

This deposition is considered in the same way to be of five kinds and

concerns (all the mantras) with their varieties, however many they be (in all

the Tantras), that denote Śiva, (His) Power and the individual soul.

However, (one should take care) that wherever the (mantra) which is

invoked (happens to be), that it is present there with its limbs and should
be the sixth (deposition). This sixfold (deposition) is mentioned everywhere

(in the scriptures). (47-48)

The Sacrificial Substances and the Sacrificial Vessel

TTṬṬRTĪĪTRTT JTaTJTTĪHATGTT;: |

MV 8/44-46ab is concisely paraphrased as TĀ 15/254-255ab. MV 8/46ab 1s quoted in TĀv ad
15/255cd.
“Ś Read vātaphalārthibhiḥ for vā tatphalārthībhīḥ.
TĀ 15/257, where MV 8/47 1s quoted, reads bhedāḥ for bhedaih and soḍhaiva krtitaḥ for
pañcavidho mataḥ. Thus, the translation of the text there in the TĀ is: ‘The sixfold deposition (in
this case) 1s said to be one 1n which (the Mantras deposited) are the knds amongst these Mantras
(taught in any of the Tantras), however many they be, that denote Śiva, (His) Power and the
1mdividual soul.
“ Read with TĀ 15/258a, kiṁtv āvāhyas tu for kimtu bāhyastu.

' TĀ 15/258 1s a direct citation of MV 8/48.

TANTRĀLOKA

svānuṣṭhānāvirodhena bhāvābhāvavikalpanaiḥ |
yāgadravyāṇi sarvāṇi kāryāṇi vidhivadbudhaiḥ || 49 ||
The wise (unafflicted) by notions of existence and non-existence

should prepare all the sacrificial substances as (enjoined by the appropriate)
procedure without being in conflict with (the requirements of) their own ritual
observance (svānuṣṭhāna).

TTSHĒTJHICTA TaTATaTTJTĪTTTḤ |

tato ʻrghapātramādāya bhāvābhāvāvikalpitam ḷ
tataścāstrāgnisaṁdagdhaṁ śaktyambuplāvitaṁ śuvi l/ 5O II
Then taking up the sacrificial vessel (arghapātra) which, devoid of
notions of existence or non-existence, burnt by the fire of the Weapon and
flooded by the water of Śakti, is pure.

kartavyā yasya saṁśuddhiranyasyāpyatra vastunaḥ |
tasyāṇenaiva mārgeṇa prakartavyā vijānatā || 51 I|
(Whatever) is to be purified, be it this entity or something else, that

should be done in this very same way by one who knows (how to do it).

=zf7 II u= II
nā cāsaṁśodhitaṁ vastu kiṁcidapyatra kalpayet |

tena śuddhaṁ tu sarvaṁ yadaśuddhamapi tacchuci | 52 |

Read bhāvābhāvāvikalpanaiḥ for bhāvābhāvavikalḹpanaiḥ; the meaning it seems is that the

officiant should not worry whether a sacrificial substance that is normally required for a rte is

amongst the offerings or not. Whatever inspires him 1s pleasing to the deity. As Abhinavagupta
writes:

‘It is not specified which substances are (best suited) for the sacrifice nor the liquid

offering (argha). (This is because) the cause of (attaning) the partcular accomplishment of one

who desires accomplishments (ss the type of) practtce (sādhanā) (and the offering of a particular
sacrificial substances that that entals). (However,) for one who aspires to liberation, nothing is

prohibited or enjoined; whatever 1s pleasing (to him) is fit to bring about oneness with Śiva’s
consciousness.' TĀ 15/290cd-291.
See TĀ 30/41cd.

MV 8/51 is quoted in TĀv ad 15/420cd-421ab (417cd-418ab).

Variant reading: kiṅcid apyupakalpayed.
k; ṣahśodhitaṁ ca yat sarvam

APPENDIX G

One should not think (kalpayet) that any substance, whatever it be
(that is offered) here (in this rite), has not been purified (by it). Purified by

that, everything, even what is impure, (becomes) pure.

Tīargāī gaTḡd ūgcṀ: aata = |

tadambunā samāpūrya ṣaḍbhiraṅgaiḥ samarpya ca |

amrtīkr̥tya sarvāṇi tena dravyāṇi śodhayet || 53 ||

After having filled (the sacrificial vessel) with water, offered it with the
six limbs (of the mantra, and thus) transformed it into nectar, all the (sacrificial)
substances should be purified with it.

The Inner Sacrifice
The Trika Trident

āgaīa- fi
aṃ |

ātmānaṁ pūjayitvā tu kuryādantaḥ kṛtiṁ yathā |
tathā te kathayiṣyāmi sarvayogigaṇārcite || 54 ||
O goddess who is honoured by all the host of yogis, I will tell you no'
how, after having worshipped the Self, the inner sacrifice is performed.

JTaṛq āHRAIĪT; 3 Tā¥YĪqTPḶTT |
{ 3ãāẽ ũĨĨã ṀTN -cl rgga || uv II

EEYEGEEEIETZZIEIZEIETIT 1

ādāv ādhāraśaktiṁ tu nābhyadhaś caturaṅgulām |
dharāṁ surodaṁ potaṁ ca kandaśceti catuṣṭayam || 55 ||

ekaikāṅgulametatsyācchūlasyāmalasārakam

The Base of the Trident
“nitially, the Energy of the Foundation (should be projected into the
base of the Trident) four fingers below the naval. (Then) the four, that is, Earth
MV 8/52 is quoted in TĀ 15/162cd-163ab. The reading in the KSTS edition of the MV 8/52b is

atra kalpayei, whereas in TĀ 15/162d it is upakalpayet.
S k: ṣadbhirarghair.

k: caturaṅgulametad.

TANTRĀLOKA

(dharā), Water (suroda), the Boat (pota) and the Bulb (kanda), each (taking up)

a finger breadth, constitute the swelling at the base (āmalasāraka) of the

Trident. (55-56ab)

ftzāraitraaīī vrōītd rfrftā |

tato nālamanantākhyaṁ daṇḍamasya prakalpayet |I 56 ||
lambikāvadhitaścātra śūlordhvaṁ granthiriṣyate |
abhittvainaṁ mahādevi pāśajālamahārṇavam || 57 II
na sa yogamavāpnoti śivena saha mānavaḥ |

The Shaft of the Trident
Then (beyond that) one should imagine the channel which is the staff of
that (Trident) called Ananta that extends up to the uvula. There is said to be a
knot above the staff.” O great Goddess, without piercing through (that) great
ocean of nets and fetters, a man does not attain union (yoga) with Siva. (56cd-

58ab)

Maāyā at the Uvula

rqṣga || u ||
TaṀ ṣq,

fēa] ā=J ēīq II u Il

dharmaṁ jñānaṁ ca vairāgyamaiśvaryaṁ ca catuṣṭayam || 58 II
koṇeṣu cintayenmantrī āgneyādiṣvanukramāt |
gātrakāṇāṁ catuṣkaṁ ca dikṣu pūrvādiṣu smaret || 59 ||

The reciter of mantra should meditate on the four qualities (of the

intellect), namely righteousness (dharma), knowledge (jñāna), dispassion
(vairāgya) and lordship (aiśvarya), in the four (intermediate) directions,
beginning with the southeast up to the northeast. Again, he should meditate on

“ TĀ 15/297cd-365 is a commentary on MV 8/55-84ab, most of which is quoted or paraphrased
as it goes along. These verses deal with the projection of the Trident of the Trika mandala into the

vútal breath. Abhimavagupta describes the Trika Trident Throne 1n 15/297cd-312, following quite
closely the account in MV 8/55-68.
l MV 8/55 quoted 1n TĀv ad 15/297cd-303ab.
“ Read nālordhvaṁ for śūlordhvaṅ.

APPENDIX G

the four cornices (gātraka) in the four-directions, starting with the east. (58cd-

59)

The Square at Śuddhavidyā between the Uvula and Cavity of Brahmā

faīāā ēarçvszīaāqgan I| 6o

grantherūrdhvaṁ trīśūlādho bhavitavyā catuṣkikā |
vidyātattvaṁ tadevāhuśchaṁdanatrayasaṁṅyutam |I 60 ll
kakhalaṃbikayormadhye tattattvamanucintayet |
One should meditate (in this way) on the square base (catuṣkikā) which
is above the knot and below the three prongs. They say that it is the principle of
(Pure) Knowledge and that it has two coverings. One should meditate

(anucintayet) on that principle in the middle (between) the Cavity of Brahmā

(kakha) and the uvula. (60-61ab)

The Lotus of the Īśvara Principle in the Cavity of Brahmā

ra7ṣṝftṁ aaācāāṇ% fāāga: || a |I
padmākr̥ti kakhatattvamaiśvaraṁ cintayedbudhah || 61 ||

karṇikākesaropetaṁ sabījaṁ” vikasatsitam ḷ

The wise man should meditate (cintayet) on the Īśvara principle within

the Cavity of Brahma (kakha).”" Its form a lotus flower, blooming and white, it

has a calix, stamens and seeds. (61cd-62ab)

“ The gātrakas are elevated cornices that adorn the corners of the throne. Cf. Kṣemarāja ad SVT
2/63, who defines them as siṁhāsanapaṭṭikārūpāḥ, and ad NT 18/41: gātrakāṇi koṇāntarāḷagā

avayavaviśeṣāḥ. On these cornices, which according to the SvT are white, and according to the
NT, yellow, are projected from the eastern to northern corner impiety (adharma), ignorance

(ajñāna), lack of detachment (avairāgya) and lack of mastery (anatśvarya).
“kh: chadanadvayeti.
k; kakhalamhakayormadhye tattvvamanuvcintayedityeyaṁvtdhaḥ.
“ Read wth MS Kh, chadanadvaya- for chadanatraya-.
“’ MV 8/61 is quoted in TĀv ad 15/297cd-303ab.

Ś k: kṛti kakhe tattvam.
cintayettata.
”°k: bījaṁ vikasitaṁ sitam.

Read, as Sanderson suggests (1986: 179, n 47) kakhe for kakha-.

TANTRĀLOKA

r̥ãṁzā: ũarmgraīṝcīaḥ a-q || ē2 ||l

āsfārzv] ta āfaaōḷ ī || ē. |l

pūrvapatrāditaḥ paścādvāmādinavakaṁ nyaset || 62 |

vāmā jyeṣṭhā ca raudrī ca kālī ceti tathā parā" |
kalavikaraṇī caiva balavikaraṇī tathā || 63 ||

balapramathanī cānyā sarvabhūtadamanyapi |
manonmanī
ca madhye ‘pi bhānumārgeṇa vinyaset || 64 ||
One should then deposit the group of nine (goddesses) Vāmā and the
rest (on the petals) beginning with the eastern one. (They are) Vāmā, Jyeṣṭhā,

Raudrī,

and then Kālī,

Kalavikaraṇī,

Balavikaraṇī,

and Balapramathinī.

Sarvabhūtadamanī is also another one and Manonmanī is in the centre. One
should deposit them following the path of the sun (i.e., clockwiṣe). (62cd-64)

fēṝTst fōk-ṁ sṬēṣar aāf aṇfṀ̄ ṣar || s., lIl

vibhvādinavakaṁ cānyadvilomātparikalpayet |
vibhurjñānĩ kriyā cecchvā vāgīśī jvālinī tathā lI 6 |

vāmā jyeṣṭhā ca raudrī ca sarvāḥ kālānalaprabhāḥ |

One should then imagine (vikalpayet) another group of nine (goddesses)
beginning with Vibhvī (arranged) anticlockwise. (They are) Vibhvī, Jñānī,
Kriyā, lcchā, Vāgīṣī, Jvālinī, Vāmā, Jyeṣṭhā, and Raudrī. All of them (shine)

with the light of the Fire of Time.” (65-66ab)

ã Ũṃṣ̄. samṁar: || s. ||

ll

brahmaviṣṇuharāḥ pūryaṁ ye śāktāḥ pratipāditāḥ || 66 ||
dalakeṣaramadhyasthā maṇḍalānāṁ ta īśvarāḥ |
” k tataḥ.

” Verses 60-66ab are paraphrased and explained 1n TĀ 15/302-306. Verses 61-66ab are quoted in
TĀv ad 15/303cd-307.

APPENDIX G

dhvani cārkenduvahnīnāṁ saṁjñayā paribhāvayet || 67 I
In the centre, the stamens and the petals, one should meditate
(respectively) on Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Hara, taught previously, empowered (with
these energies). (They are) the lords of the circles of the Fire, Moon and Sun.

(66cd-67)

ārvīrTāīēqdīṁcāai arī || . lII
īśvaraṁ ca mahāpretaṁ prahasantaṁ sacetanam |

kālāgnikoṭivapuṣamityevaṁ sarvamāsanam” || 68 |I
Sadāśiva The Great Ghost (Mahāpreta)
And (above Pure Knowledge one should contemplate) Iśvara (and
above him Sadāśiva), the Great Ghost, who is (full of) consciousness and

laughing, His body (blazing like) millions of Fires of Time.™
rkrg

II

dīfṭrsara ācōfTīṝcrārcqzaāa7q I| '9o |
tasya nābhyutthitaṁ śaktiśūlaśṛṅgatrayaṁ smaret |
kakhatrayeṇa niryātaṁ dvādaśāntāvasānakam || 69 ||
cintayet tasya śṛṅgeṣu śāktaṁ padmatrayaṁ tataḥ |
sarvādhiṣṭhāyakaṁ śuklamityetatparamāsanam || 70 ||

The Three Prongs
One should (now) recollect the three prongs of the Trident of Energy
(śaktiśūla) that have arisen from (Sadāśiva’s) navel. They exit as three (rays
from) within the Cavity of Brahmā (on the crown of the head) and end in the

End of the Twelve. Then one should think that on its prongs there are three

lotuses empowered (by the three powers), white and presiding over all. This is

the supreme throne.” (69-70)

The text here is partially corrupt. The sense however is clear on the basis of TĀ 15/307 and also
SVT 2/72cd-73.

” parātri tyetatsarvam.

B

7“ MV 8/68 is quoted in the TĀv ad 15/312. See TĀ 15/309-310.

” Read kakhe trayeṇa for kakhaiayeṇa.

7 MV 8/69-70 are quoted in TĀv ad 15/313-314, which is an explanatory paraphrase of them.

TANTRĀLOKA

tatropari tato mūrtiṁ vidyākhyāmanucintayet |
ātmākhyāṁ ca tatastasyāṁ pūryanyāsaṁ śivātmakam || 71 II
Then there, above (that), one should think of the Icon (mirti) called

Vidyā and then the one called the Self. Within that is the preceding deposition,

which is Śiva by nature.”

Visualized Forms of the Three Goddesses

iaEkREḵt Ṁ;

I ḶetkṝevEĀEIEḶIEḤI
ā aīr̥ 3 tīoṁ gvīra II 's I|
tato madhye parāṁ śaktiṁ dakṣiṇottarayordvayam |

parāparāṁ svarūpeṇa raktavarṇāṁ mahābalām || 72. ||
icchārūpadharāṁ dhyātvā kiṁcidugrāṁ na bhīṣaṇām |
aparāṁ vāmaśrṅge tu bhīṣaṇāṁ kṛṣṇapiṅgalām || 73 II
Then, (one should contemplate) the supreme power (Parā) in the middle

and the (other) two on the right and the left. Parāparā (on the right) is red by

nature and very powerful. She bears the form of the will (> sic. knowledge) and
is somewhat fierce (but) not frightening (bhīṣaṇa). Having visualized (her,
meditate on) Aparā on the left prong, who is frightening and tawny-black. (72-

73)

ṢBTETIT ZafĪ JJāītcfeṣāsrāīq |

sfḷavsfī a vīk r̥caa[̃ fr |

icchārūpadharāṁ devīṁ praṇatārtivināśinīm |
parāṁ cãpyãyanĩṁ devīĩṁ candrakoṭyayutaprabhām || 74 |
ṣaḍvidhe ʻpi kṛte śākte mūrtyādāvapi cintayet |
Once performed the six-fold (deposition) of power, as is done with the

Icon and the rest, one should think of Parā, the goddess who bears the form of
7 See TĀ 15/321-323ab.

The meaning here is unclear. See TĀ 15/326ab. Read mārtāv iva for mārtāv api

APPENDIX G

the will and destroys the suffering of (her) devotees (praṇata). She is the
goddess who nourishes (all) and shines with the light of billions of moons.

(74-75ab)

faītāzē vgrar-razq fēzzā I| ou, ||
TTTRPĪTTTTTĪ ēfiī
arṣh-rq |
vidyāṅgapañcakaṁ paścādāgneyyādiṣu vinyaset || 75 II
agnīśarakṣovāyūnāṁ dakṣiṇe ca yathākramam |

After that one should deposit the five limbs of the Vidyā in the south-

east etc., that is, in the southeast, northeast, soutwest, north-west and south, in
due order. (75cd-76ab).

ā-q || sē ||

śaktyaṅgāni śivāṅgāni tathaiva vidhinā smaret || 76 ||
kiṁ tu śakrādidikṣv astramantraṁ madhye ca locanam |
aghorādyaṣṭakaṁ dhyāyed aghoryādyasṣṭakānvitam || 77 ||
One should recollect with the same procedure the limbs of Śakti and

those of Śiva. However, (one should also) meditate on the Weapon mantra in

(all) the directions, beginning with (east governed by) Indra, the Eye in the
middle and (on the petals of the lotus), the group of eight beginning with
Aghora along with the eight (corresponding goddesses) beginning with Aghorī.
(76cd-77)

sarvāsām āvṛtatvena lokapālāṁś ca bāhyataḥ |
Then having reflected on the guardians of the quarters along with (their)
weapons as encompassing all of them externally by means of their own mantras.

(78ab)

graīṁzṁ4: aftrca sṝ ũarcaā || sc l|

TĀ 15/323cd-325 is a paraphrase of MV 8/72-75ab.
TĀ 15/353cd-365 is a paraphrase of MV 8/75cd-84ab interspersed with direct quotations. MV
8/75cd-76ab 1s quoted 1n TĀv ad 15/357cd-358 (357-358ab).

TÁNTRĀLOKA

gāz#āūilī īṝ-s ērra++vtrzz |

sāstrān svamantraiḥ saṁcintya japaṁ paścāt samārabhet |I| 78 II
svarūpe tallayo bhūtvā ekaikāṁ daśadhā smaret |

jvalatpāvakasaṁkāśāṁ dhyātvā svāhāntam uccaret || 79 |l
sakr̥d ekaikaśo mantrī homakarmaprasiddhaye |
ity eva mānaso yāgaḥ kathitaḥ sāmudāyikaḥ || 80 |I

After that one should begin to repeat the mantra and, merged into one’s
own nature, one should recollect each one (of the Vidyās (?)) ten times. Having
meditated on (each one) to be like a blazing fire, the one who recites mantra
should utter SVĀHĀ at the end, once for each one, in order to render the

oblation (homakarman) successful.

Such is the mental sacrifice (mānasayāga) which is said to be made of
the assemblage (of mantras) (sāmudayika). (78cd-80)

gradzft=āaā úṁṁ]g a-- I| ¢ l|

etattriśūlamuddiṣṭamekadaṇḍaṁ triśaktikam |
itthametadavijñāya śaktiśūlaṁ varānane || 81 II

baddhvāpi khecarīṁ mudrāṁ notpatatyavanītalāt |
This is the Trident, which is it said has one staff and three powers. 0

fair faced (goddess), without knowing the Trident of (the three) powers (to be
such) in this way, although he forms the gesture of the Skyfaring Goddess, he
does not fly up from the surface of the earth.™ (81-82ab)

qddī-raīṛ faṁt=frr ṛōrzā āām |

ityetacchāmbhavaṁ proktamaṣṭāntaṁ śāktamiṣyate || 82||
turyāntamāṇavaṁ vidyāditi śūlatrayaṁ matam |
Thus,

this is said to be the Divine (śāmbhava) (Trident).

The

Empowered one (śākta) is considered (to reach up only to) the end of eight
(fingers” space above the Cavity of Brahmā). One should know that the
MV 8/784-80ab is quoted in TĀv ad 15/359cd-361ab (359-360) See there for details.

MV 8/81cd-82ab is quoted in TĀv ad 15/361cd-363ab (361-362). TĀ 15/(361cd-365ab) (361364) expands and explains MV 8/81-83ab, 84ab.

APPENDIX G

Individual (Trident) ends four (fingers’ space above it). This is considered to be
the triple Trident. (82cd-83ab)

prthagyāgavidhānena śakticakraṁ vicintayet || 83 ||
tenāpi khecarīī baddhvā tyajatyevaṁ mahītalam |

(One can also) meditate on the assembly of powers (śakticakra) by the
procedure (in which the deities) are worshipped individually (prthagyāgavidhānena). By that (means also), once having formed (the gesture of) the
Skyfaring (Goddess), he quits in the same way the surface of the earth. (83cd84ab)

za|| ç |I

tato ʻbhimantrya dhānyāni mahāstreṇa trisaptadhā || 84 ||
niksipeddikṣu sarvāsu jvalatpāvakavatsmaret |
nirvighnaṁ tadgrṛhaṁ dhyãtvã saṁhr̥tyeśadiśaṁ nayet || 85 |
Then, after having consecrated grains of wheat with the great Weapon
twenty-one times, he should scatter them in all the directions, meditating on
them as being like a burning fire. Having meditated on that abode (of the
sacrifice) as being free of obstacles and having gathered (the grains) together, he
should place (them) in the northeastern quarter. (84cd-85)

r-rāçaārá-: ũdz- aīc- |

MV 8/82cd-83ab quoted 1n TĀv ad 15/363cd-364ab (363) of which 1t is a paraphrase. See TĀ
15/361cd-363ab (361-362).

Kh;: śaktipadmam.

Ṣee TĀ 15/365.

TĀ 15/365cd-366ab) (365) is an explanation of MV 8/83cd-84ab (not quoted by Jayaratha).

This 1s where Gaṇeśa 1s worshipped. MV 8/85d is quoted in TĀv ad 15/377cd-378ab (376cd377). See TĀ 15/369cd-370ab (369).

TANTRĀLOKA

pañcagavyaṁ tataḥ kuryādvadanaiḥ pañcabhirbudhaḥ |
gomiūtraṁ gomayaṁ caiva kṣīṝraṁ dadhi ghrṛtaṁ tathã || 86 ||
mantrayedūrdhvaparyantaiḥ ṣaḍaṅgena kuśodakam |
mudre dravyāmṛte baddhvā tattvaṁ tasya vicintayet || 87 |I
tena saṅprokṣayedbhūmiṁ svalpenānyannidhāpayet 1
The wise man should then (consecrate) the five products of a cow, that

is, cow urine, dung, milk, curd and clarified butter, (with the mantras of the)
five faces (of Sadāśiva) and with the six limbs. He should consecrate the water
(in which sacred) kuśa (grass is immersed) with the six limbs, ending with the

upper ones (?) . . .' One should sprinkle the ground with a little of this (water)
and set aside the rest.” (86-88ab)

ṭGUIEHE-IRUIāVEEEIGFĪḤ|[ṈĀĀṈIḷ
ṬṀÑJTGTTI TĒTT JṬPTT I

vāstuyāgaṁ tataḥ kuryānmālinyuccārayogataḥ || 88 |I

puṣpairañjalimāpūrya phakārādi samuccaran |

dhyātvā śaktyantamadhvānaṁ nakārānte vinikṣipet || 89 |I
One should then offer sacrifice to the site (vāstuyāga), in association

with the utterance of Mālinī. Having filled one’s cupped hands with flowers
whilst uttering (the Mālinī alphabet in reverse) beginning with PH and having

meditated on (all) the path ending with Śakti, he should throw (them as an
offering) after (uttering) the letter N (with which the Mālinī alphabet begins).

(88cd-89)

Worship of Gaṇeśa

TgGYTTH-Ī =JS JŪTIĪ Ṭārĩ || <o ||

EṭRIĀIERECAEUĀAĒĒTEGIUETĪI[KTAI

“’kt nānyadvdārayed

l I cannot understand the following line (8/87cd): mudre dravāmṛtaṁ baddhvā tattvaṁ taṣya

vicintayet | Abhinavagupta does not refer to it.

“ See TĀ 15/371-372.

MV 8/88cd-89 is quoted in TĀv ad 15/375cd-376 (375-376ab) which elaborates on these

verses.

APPENDIX G

feārs fafxzārr=q ēcārqgsrāq I| <3 |l
gandhadhũūpādikaṁ datvā gaṇeśānaṁ prapūjayet |
saḍutthamāsanaṁ nyasya praṇavena tatopari ||/ 90 ||

gāmityanena vighneśaṁ gandhadhūpādibhiryajet |

asyāṅgāni gakāreṇa ṣaḍḍīrghasvarayogataḥ || 91 |I
trinetramuditaṁ dhyātvā gajāsyaṁ vāmanākṛtim |
viṣarjya siddhikāmastu mahāstramanupūjayet || 92 ||
After having offered perfume and incense etc., one should worship
Gaṇeśa. After having placed a seat (for him) generated from six (components, as
will be explained), one should worship the Lord of Obstacles with (the syllable)

GŪAUM and with perfumes and flowers etc.”” His limbs (are formed) with the

letter G in conjunction with the six long (vowels). Having meditated on him as

having three eyes and joyful, with the face of an elephant and form of a dwarf,
then he who desires accomplishments should, after he has been dismissed,
worship the great Weapon (Mantra).” (90-92)

ītaz ḹtrāraṁ ] vgcaīūraā7 I| <3 ||
dattvānantaṁ tathā dharmaṁ jñānaṁ vairāgyameva ca |
aiśvaryaṁ karṇikāyāṁ ca' ṣaḍutthamidamāsanam || 93 ||
(This is done) once Ananta, Dharma, Knowledge, Dispassion, Mastery

and the calix (of a lotus) have been put in place. This is the throne made of six
(components).

The Deity of the Weapon

fā- nrzr nēṁ yādqa I| <x II

k: gandhapuspādibhir.

“ Variant reading: tasyāṅgānīn.

Read with K, gandhapuṣpādībhir, which 1s the standard formula for the anomalous gandhadhūpādibhir.

MV 8/91-92ab is quoted in TĀv ad 15/377cd-378ab (376cd-377) The KSTS edition of the MV
reads gām ity anena for gūauṁ ity anena.
” In TĀ 15/(378cd-381ab) (377 + 2, 3 and 4), Abhinavagupta summarizes MV 8/92cd-100. MV
8/92cd is quoted 1n the TĀv ad 15/378cd-381ab (377 + 2, 3 and 4).

kh, g: ceti.

! MV 8/93 quoted in TĀv ad 15/377cd-378ab (376cd-377) which elaborate on it. Cf. SŚP 1/128129.

TANTRĀLOKA

asyopari nyaseddhyātvā khaḍgakheṭakadhāriṇam |

vikarālaṁ mahādaṁṣṭtraṁ mahograṁ bhrukuṭĩīmukham || 94 ||

svāṅgaṣaṭkasamopetaṁ diṅmātṛparivāritam |

svārṇairevāṅgaṣaṭkam tu phaṭkāraparidīpitam l| 95
Place (the deity of the Weapon) on it, having meditated (on him) as
bearing a sword and shield. He has big teeth and his mouth gapes terribly; very
fierce, the eyebrows on his face are knit. He is possesses his own six limbs and
is surrounded by the Mothers of the directions. The group of six limbs (are
fashioned) with their own (respective) vowels and are well energized by the

syllable PHAT. (94-95)

The Eight Mothers and their Worship

ṣ̄ Ūdṁī q asĩ g m?ēxq II <e ll

sr-īā tīkēzāī 7 arṝ ōeakt m: |

ī-kt aṣoṃḷ s; ararsĩ

fēṛ. || <v ||

GgTTTTJ EzEGII EEE šIše

pī |

tadrūpameva saṁcintya tato mātraṣṭakaṁ yajet |
indrāṇīṁ pūryapatre tu savajrāṁ yugapatsmaret || 96 ||
āgneyūṁ śaktihastāṁ ca yāmyāṁ daṇḍakarāṁ tataḥ |
nair-rtīṁ varuṇānĩṁ ca vãyavĩṁ ca vicakṣaṇaḥ || 97 ||
khaḍgapāśadhvajairyuktāṁ cintayedyugapatpriye |
kauverūī mudgarakarāmīśānīṁ śūlasaṅyutām || 98 II
Having meditated intensely on that form, the group of eight Mothers

should be worshipped. Indrāṇī is on the eastern petal. Recollect her at the same
time along with (her weapon), the thunderbolt. The (Mother) in the southeast,

AĀgneyī, holds a javelin (śakti) in her hand. Then (meditate on) Yāmyā (who is
on the southern petal and) holds a staff. 0 beloved, the skilled (practitioner)
should think simultaneously of Nairṛtī (in the southwest), Varuṇānī (in the west)

and Vāyavī (in the northwest) as bearing a sword, noose and flag (respectively).
Kauverī (in the north) holds a mallet and Iśānī (in the northeast) bears a

trident. (96-98)

hoōōi āāī-deaīraṅā || << ||

2 . kh. sāṅgatḥ (sārṇaiḥ) ityevaṅvidhaḥ.

MV 8/94-98 is quoted in TĀv ad 15/378cd-381ab (377 + 2, 3 and 4).

APPENDIX G

kiEkTĀUḤEIEĒÉEAICTĀKETI
gandhapuṣpādibhiḥ pūjya ṣvatantre homamācaret |
ādau ca kalaśaṁ kuryātsahasrādhikamantritam || 99 ||
sahasraṁ homayettatra tato japtvā visarjayet |
śatamaṣṭottaraṁ pūrṇaṁ paścādyajanamārabheṭ || 100 ||
Having worshipped them with perfume and flowers etc., one should, O
free one, offer an oblation (homa). First of all, one must consecrate the small
jar (kalaśa) with over a thousand repetitions of mantra. One should (then) make
a thousand offerings there to the fire, and then after having repeated the mantra

(japa) for a full hundred and eight times, (the diety) should be sent away."'
After that one should commence the sacrifice. (99-100)

The Sacrifice
The Large and the Little Jar, Placement and Worship

ā̄? ṭḍPTTITTA ēHITTTTJTĪT |
gdṁjaāīrsrrṁṀ raragaTgfā I| g 2 ||
īrāfcrhrāīdṁ fāṁaagāma I| .2 ||
JITPTTTGSTdT TGG-āJTTJfTĪT |

tatrādau kumbhamādāya hemādimayamavraṇam |

sarvamaṁntrauṣadhīgarbha'ṁ gandhāmbuparipūritam | 101 II
cūtapallavavaktraṁ ca srakṣūtrasitaṁkaṇṭhakam |
rakṣoghratilakākrāntaṁ sitavastrayugāvṛtam || 102 ||

śatāṣṭottarasaṁjapta mūlamantraprapūjitam 1

vārdhānyapi tathābhūtā kūṁtu sastreṇa pūjitā || 103 |I
There in the beginning (of the rite), one should take a jar without cracks

made of gold or the like, that contains all (kinds of) jewels and herbs' and is

completely filled with fragrant water, its mouth (adorned) with young mango
MV 8/99cd-100c is quoted in TĀv ad 15/378cd-381ab (377 + 2, 3 and 4).
Variant reading: sarvaratnausadhīgarbham.

Ó Variant readnng: krtakanṭhakam.
' k. śūlamantraprapūritam.

. Read as in the citaton of tms passage in TĀv and 381cd-388ab (378-385ab),

sarvaratnauṣadhī- for sarvamantrauṣadhī-. We find the same expression below in 1 1/44ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

leaves and a garland and thread fashioned as its necklace. It is covered with

a mark (tilaka) that serves to destroy demons' and is wrapped in a white cloth.
It is worshipped with the root Mantra repeated one hundred and eight times.""
The small jar (vārdhānī) is also (adorned) like that, however, (unlike the large

jar) it is worshipped with the Weapon (mantra). (101-103)

vikirairāsanaṁ dattvā pūrvoktaṁ tu vicakṣaṇaḥ |
indrādīnpūjayetpaścātsvadikṣu proktasvasvaraiḥ l| 104 1I
Once the skilful (officiant) has offered the seat mentioned previously
(for the jar) along with the scattered grains (on which it is placed), he should
worship Indra and the rest (of the guardians of the quarters each) in their own

quarter with their own vowels, as stated (previously)."

avicchinnāṁ tato dhārāṁ vārdhānyā pratipādayet |
bhrāmayetkalaśaṁ paścādbrūyāllokeśvarānidam || 105 ||

bho bhoḥ śakra tvayā svasyāṁ diśi vighnapraśāntaye |
sāvadhānena karmāntaṁ bhavitavyaṁ śivājñayā || 106 ||

(The disciple) should then cause an unbroken stream (of liquid) to fall
from the small jar (vārdhanī), and after that (the teacher) should rotate it around

the large jar (kalaśa), saying this to the lords of the regions:
“O! O! Sakra, by Siva’s command you should attend with care on your
quarter (of space) up to the end of the rite, so that (demonic) obstacles (there)
may be quelled.” (105-106)

Read, as 1n the citation in TĀv, -kṛtakanthakam for -sitakaṇṭhakam.
! The expresston rakṣoghnatilakākrāntam may also be understood to mean ‘covered with white

musṣtard (rakṣoghna) and sesame (seeds), which seems to me to be less likely

'" Read -saṁjaptamūla- for -saṁjaptaṁ mila-.

12 TA 15/381cd-391ab (378-388ab) are a paraphrase of MV 8/101-109. MV 8/101-103
is quoted
in TĀv ad 15/381cd-388ab (378-385ab). Abhinavagupta condenses these verses 1nto TĀ 15/381382a.

See above, MV 3/66-67 and TĀ 30/42-43ab. Concerning verses 105 to 108 see TĀ 15/378cd-

385ab.

k: yhnopaśāntaye.

APPENDIX G

āīa āfkrtermī arāīṁīṝ fāfrārtq II| go |l
nītvā tatrāsane pūrvaṁ mūrtibhūtaṁ' ghaṭaṁ nyaset |
tasya dakṣiṇadigbhāge vārdhānīṁ viniveśayet' || 107 ||
Having brought the jar which serves as the icon (of the deity), one

should place it there on (its) seat in the east.'" One should place the (small) jar
(vārdhānī) in the quarter to its right (dakṣiṇa).'

TTATTĪRfṝ:
TSA āīāī-ī Ūr̄Tvzq I| g. ||
ātmamūrtyādipūjyāntaṁ kumbhe vinyasya mantravit |

gandhapuṣpādibhiḥ pūjya vārdhānyāṁ pūjayedimam" |/ 108 II
Once the knower of mantra has deposited onto the (big) jar (kumbha)
(the mantras) beginning with that of the icon of the Self (ātmamiūrti) up to that
of the object of worship and worshipped with scent and flowers etc., he should

worship the Weapon within the (small) jar.
The Fire Sacrifice

fa; arāēāa ar || z

The Purification of the Fire (agnisaṅṣkāra)

gandhairmaṇḍalakaṁ' kr̥tvā brahmasthāne vicakṣaṇaḥ |
tatra saṁpūjayetṣaṭkaṁ
' trikaṁ' vāpyekameva vā | 109 ||
Once the skilled (practitioner) has fashioned the maṇḍala with scents

(or unguents), in (the middle of the abode of the sacrifice, which is) the
"' k: mārtibhūtāṁ parām.

"! Variant reading: vivedayed
' Ṟead pūrve for pūrvam.

'' MV 8/107 1s quoted in TĀv ad 15/381cd-388ab (378-385ab). TĀ 15/387cd-388ab (384cd-

385ab) is an explanatory paraphrase of MV 8/107.
" kh: pūjayedāsim.

'” MS Kh reads asim —- ‘sword’ or ‘weapon’ for 1mam — ‘this’. See commentary on SYT 3/70cd75ab.

Variant reading: gandhamaṇḍalakamiti; kh’ manumaṇḍalakam.
kh: saṁpūjayecchaṁkham.

' Varant reading: trike veti.

TĀ 15/387cd (384cd) reads gandhamandale for gandhair manḍalakaṁ.

TANTRĀLOKA

location of Brahmā, he should worship either the group of six or the triad (of

goddesses) or just one.

āqvraTaāīē āsrāxṛṛ+ aar || 230 ||
R̥TRTITTTĒTTJṬTI a redrrT] |
kuṇḍasyollēkhanaṁ lekhaḥ kuṭṭanaṁ copalepanam |
catuṣpathākṣavāṭaṁ ca vajrasaṁsthāpanaṁ tathā l| 110 l|
kuśāstaraṇaparidhiviṣṭarāṇāṁ ca kalpanam
(AII the preparatory purificatory rites) of the sacrificial hearth (kuṇḍa),
including the digging, sprinkling, beating (of the ground to flatten it), the
smearing, the cross, the enclosure (akṣavāṭa), the fashioning of the carpet of
kuśa grass, the enclosing trench (paridhi), and the seat of kuśa grass (viṣṭara),
(as well as) the installation of the thunderbolt, should be done with the

Weapon. (110-111cd)

gatṁzāvī agfī famaātat
aā || z22 II
ftraāīTaftr frz+īza ūŪqṣa fṝcaiá : |

sarvamastreṇa kurvīta vidyārmohīmiti nyaset |I
śivamomiti vinyasya saṁpūjya dvitayaṁ punaḥ |
tāmrapātre śarāve vā ānayejjātavedasam || 112 ||
śivaśukramiti dhyātvā vidyāyonau vinikṣipet |

I II

One should deposit the (Mālinī) Vidyā OṀ HṚĪṀ. Having deposited the

Siva (Mātṛkā with an initial) OM and worshipped both again, he should bring
the fire on a copper or earthenware plate. Having meditated (on it thinking that

it is) Siva's seed, it should be cast into the womb (yoni) of the Vidyā. (11 1cd113ab)

ārṝkaīgā; v faāãā rāq I| 2 Il

' MV 8/109 is quoted in TĀv ad 15/388cd-391ab (385cd-388ab).
ṬĀ 15/402-404ab (399-401ab) comment on MV 8/110-11ab.

kkh: vidyāmamdrīm.

MV 8/111d-113ab is quoted in the TĀv ad 15/405cd-406ab (402cd-403ab). ‘Having moved
three times around outside the pit with the syllable OṀ (dhruva).’ Ths line (quoted by Jayaratha
just after this verse) is not found in the edition of the MV

APPENDIX G

tatastvāhutayaḥ pañca vidyāṅgaireva homayet || 1 13 ||

jananādi tataḥ karma sarvamevaṁ kṛte kṛtam |

Then, one should offer five oblations with the (five) limbs of the Vidyā.
Thus, done in this way, all the (purificatory) rites beginning with (those

performed at) birth are done. (113cd-114ab)

TITWTJTTJ āI] TĪR̥fĪ ṬĪ: | z2x Il
Tqsā nṁīṁ ā: ftṁ a farstāq |

parāparāmanusmṛtya dadyāt pūrṇāhutiṁ punaḥ || 114 ||
saṁpūjya mātaraṁ vahneḥ pitaraṁ ca visarjayet |
carvādisādhanāyāgniṁ samuddhṛtya tataḥ punaḥ || 115 |I
Having recollected Parāparā, he should offer a full oblation again, and
(after) having worshipped the mother and the father of the fire, dismiss them.

Then having taken fire (from the hearth, install it) again (separately) in order to

prepare the sacrificial pap etc. (114cd-115)

Another Fire Sacrifice

sTṝ̄ ā< dāā̄ zṜ#PH TT: fkq 1| 22ē. 1
rpĩṝ a qdtāq aanzaār-aā faf: |

jvalitasyāthavā vahneś citiṁ vāmena vāyunā |
ākṛṣya hṛdi saṁkumbhya dakṣiṇena punaḥ kṣipet || 116 ||
pūrṇāṁ ca pūrvavad dadyācchivāgner aparo vidhiḥ |
Or else, the other procedure (concerning) Śiva’s fire (is as follows).

Having drawn in a flame (citi)'™" of the burning fire into the heart with (the
inhaled) breath on the left and retained it, he should expel it again with (the

exhaled breath on) the right and, as before, he should offer a full (oblation). '
(116-117ab)
' MV 8/113cd-114ab is quoted 1n TĀv ad 15/407cd-408ab (404cd-405ab). Read evarkṛte for

evaṁ kṛte.

' MV 8/115 is paraphrased and explammed in TĀ 15/414-415ab (411-412ab).

ṬĀ 15/415c (412c) reads sikhāṃ for citiṃ. trzaslate ‘cir’ as Abhinavagupta understands it to
mean, namely, ‘śikhā’ ‘{flame’. Indeed, perhaps this was the rcading in Abhinavagupta’s
manuscript of the MV. It is also possible to translate citi as ‘consciousnessʼ i. having drawn in
the consciousness (c1ti) of the burning fire . . .
MV 8/116-117ab is paraphrased and explained 1n 15/(415cd-416ab) (412cd-413ab).

TANTRĀLOKA

f?ra=d mmīrīaz zaīcāī-; āf̃; ēāāq || 22

Śivarūpaṁ tamālokya tasyātmāntaḥ kṛtih kramāt || 117 II
kuryādantaḥ kṛtiṁ mantrī tato homaṁ samārabheṭ |
(Another way to worship Śiva’s fire is) to gaze upon it (seeing that it is)
Śiva (śivarūpa); (in this way) the rite is progressively internalized into the Self.

(Thus,) the reciter of mantra should perform the inner rite and then commence

the (outer) oblation. (11 7cd-118ab)

Tō va ḍũai ṁagīṝṁ vṣga: I| z2¢ |Il
mūlaṁ śatena saṁtarpya tadaṅgāni ṣaḍaṅgataḥ || 118 I|

After having offered libation to the root mantra a hundred times, (he
should offer) libation with a sixth part (of the clarified butter) to the limbs (and
faces of the mantra), and with a tenth part, the remaining kinds of mantras.
(118cd-119ab)

āīā: ṁa-artzīar-rtxārārgaṁōaṁ I| z2
ITā Ġgcaḹ gJaTTd ēīq |ḷ

II

tataḥ pravesayecchiṣyāñśucīnsnātānuposṣitān || 119 ||
praṇamya devadeveśaṁ catuṣṭayagataṁ kramáāt |
pañcagavyaṁ caruṁ dadyãddantadhãvanameva ca || 120 l|
hṛdayena caroḥ siddhiryājñikaiḥ kṣīrataṇḍulaiḥ |

The Introduction of the Neophant
He should then introduce (his) disciples, who are pure, have bathed, and
are fasting, (into the abode of the sacrifice). Then, after having bowed to the
Lord of the gods who is present in the four (things)' in due order, he should
give (his disciples) the five products of a cow, the sacrificial pap, and (the stick)

to clean the teeth. The sacrificial pap is (prepared) successfully with sacrificial
! TĀ 15/416cd-417ab (413cd-414ab) is an explanation of MV 8/117cd-118ab (not quoted by

Jayaratha).

! k.: daśāṁśaiścaiva tarpaṇam.

Iṭ appears from TĀ 15/477 (473) that these four are the big and little jars, the fire and the Self.

APPENDIX G

rice boiled in milk and (the utterance of the) mantra of the Heart (while

cooks). (119cd-121ab)

ftraārTrr̥ftreamī amī-arraāī. aam |
saṁpātaṁ saptabhirmantraistataḥ ṣaḍbhāgabhājitam || 121 ||

Śivāgniguruśiṣyāṇāṁ' vārdhānīkumbhayoḥ samam |

(Then) the oblation (saṁpāta) is offered with (the utterance of) seven

mantras'" and (the sacrificial pap) is then divided into six (equal) portions.

(These are offered) equally to Śiva, the fire, the teacher and disciples, and to the
small (vārdhānī) and large jars (kumbha). (121cd-122ab)

dantakāṣṭhaṁ tato dadyātkṣīravṛkṣasamudbhavam || 122 |

tasya pātaḥ śubhaḥ prācīsaumyaiśāpyordhvadiggataḥ |
aśubho ‘nyatra tatrāpi homo ‘ṣṭaśatiko bhavet || 123 I|

(The teacher) should then give (them) a stick for the teeth made of

milkwood (kṣīravṛkṣa). It is auspicious for that (stick) to fall to the east,
north, northeast, west or vertically (ārdhvadik). It is inauspicious (if it falls)

elsewhere. (To remedy that, another fire sacrifice should be performed). There
(in that case) also the oblations should be one hundred and eight. (122cd-123)

aīz fēz āīg ra: |

bahiḥkarmatataḥ kuryād dikṣu sarvāsu daiśikaḥ |

oṁ kṣaḥ kṣaḥ sarvabhūtebhyaḥ svāheti manunāmunā || 124 ||
See TĀ 15/437-438.

1t seems that according to TĀ 15/439 ff. theṣe Mantras are those of the three goddesses, the

three Śaktis and Mātrsadbhāva.

MYV 8/121-122ab is quoted in TĀv ad 15/447cd-449 (444cd-446). See TĀ 15/444cd-445. There
Siva is replaced by the sthaṇḍila, that 1s, the sacrificial surface.
'“ MV 8/123 is quoted in 15/450 (447). 15/450d (447d) reads tatrāstrahomo ‘py aṣṭaśataṁ bhavet
— ‘there (1n that case) also one hundred and eight oblations should be (offered) wath the Weapon’
for MV 8/123d: tatrāp1 homo 'ṣṭaśatiko bhavet — ‘there (in that case) also the oblattons should be
one hundred and eightʼ.

“" bahihkarma emended to balkarma.

TANTRĀLOKA

The teacher should then perform the rite of offering bali in all the
quarters with this mantra: “OM KṢAḤ KṢAḤ SARVABHŪTEBHYO

The Examination of the Disciple’s Dreams

aTā̃ aa

r̥dd f-īahiīfē
#caṁī art fa-rziq Il 22Eē |l

q JṀTTĪTTTHJṬĀ ṜITTHT-Ñ
samācamya kr̥tanyāsaḥ samabhyarcya ca śaṅkaram |
k k k Ãk. 3 k . S. . S gr̥he Šuciḥ || 125

prabhāte nityakarmādi kṛtvā svapnaṁ vicārayet || 126 l||
śubhaṁ prakāśayetteṣāmaśubhe homamācaret |
Having rinsed (his mouth), performed the deposition, and worshipped

Śaṅkara. . . in the abode, pure. Having performed deposition on the disciples

and, especially, himself, and performed the regular (daily) rites and the rest at
dawn, (the teacher) should examine (each disciple’s) dream. If it is auspicious,
he reveals (the meaning) to them, whereas if it is inauspicious, he should
perform a fire sacrifice (homa). (125-127ab)

nīvṝṝ3ṁ fōmcēanmmīāqāx- ērvm I| 22¢ ||

vā faṝ yr̥s ggaṁ ftfs sīāīcaaitr̄taaṁ
I| z2< II
tataḥ puṣpaphalādīnāṁ suveśābharaṇāḥ striyaḥ || 127 |I
āpaduttaraṇaṁ caiva śubhadeśāvarohaṇam |
madyapānaṁ śīiraśchedamāmamāṁsasya bhakṣaṇam || 128 |I
devatādarśanaṁ sākṣāttathā viṣṭhānulepanam |
evaṁ vidhaṁ śubhaṁ dr̥ṣṭvā siddhiṁ prāpnotyabhīpsitām ||/ 129 ||
“2 MV 8/124 is with reference to TĀ 15/476-478ab (472-474ab) (not quoted by Jayaratha).

Most of line 8/125cd is missing.

APPENDIX G

Auspicious dreams such those of flowers, fruits and the like, women
with beautiful clothes and ornaments, escape from a calamity, ascent into
auspicious lands, the drinking of liquor, decapitation, the eating of raw meat, the
direct vision of deities, the smearing with faces -— having seen such an
auspicious (dream), he obtains the accomplishment (siddhi) he desires. (127cd-

129)

kjGUEEIGFEUGEEIEEEIEETI

etadevānyathābhūtaṁ duḥsvapna iti kīrtyate |

pakvamāṁsāśanābhyaṅgagartādipatanādikam || 130 ||
tantroktāṁ niṣkṛtiṁ krṛtvā dvijatvāpādanaṁ tataḥ |
One that is contrary to this is said to be a bad dream (duhsvapna).
(Examples are dreaming of) eating cooked meat, being smeared with unguents,
falling into a precipice and the like. After having performed the rites of
expiation taught in the Tantras' (the disciple) attains the condition of a ‘twice

bornʼ (brahmin). (130-131ab)

The Teaching of the Rules and Concluding Ablution

Ṭ̄T cāī āaT āa: || 232 ||

fēkī-rf arāqç |

devāgnigurudevīnāṁ pūjāṁ kṛtvā sadā budhaḥ || 131 1|
eteṣāmanivedyaiva na kiṅcidapi bhakṣayet |
The wise man always (eats) after having (first) worshipped the gods,
fire, teachers and goddesses, and should not eat anything without having offered

them food (first).√ (131cd-132ab)

īar=ā īzā īēšrza ass.q || z32 ||
fṝrrrē a ōū rgdnṁ raf̃q |

devadravyaṁ gurudravyaṁ caṇḍīdravyaṁ ca varjayet || 132 ||

i Read with TĀ 15/48cd adhirohaṇam for avarohaṇam.
! k: duḥkhasvapnamitīti.

See TĀ 15/481cd-489.
“ See TĀ 15/509.
15/538 (534) is a paraphrase of MV 8/132 (not quoted by Jayaratha).

TANTRĀLOKA

niṣphalaṁ naiva ceṣṭeta muhūrtamapi mantravit |
yogābhyāsarato bhīūyānmantrābhyāsarato ‘pi vā ll 133 ||
(Moreover,) he should avoid (touching) the sacrificial substances

(offered) to the god, teacher and the goddess (candī). The knower of mantra
should not act fruitlessly even for a moment. He should be devoted to the
practice of yoga and also, or else, to the practice of mantra. (132cd-133)

aāī I| g 3x Il
ūāUIĒ-EAVTEĀ:EAEAja|ttḻ!

ityevamādisamayāñśrāvayitvā visarjayet |
devadevaṁ tataḥ snānaṁ Śiṣyāṇāmātmano ‘pi vā |l 134 ||
kārayecchivakumbhena sarvaduṣkṛtahāriṇā |

Having taught (his disciples) such rules (samaya) and others like them,

(the teacher) should dismiss the God of the gods, and (then) by means of (the
water in) Siva’s jar that destroys all sin (dusṣkṛta), he should make (his)

disciplesʼ bath and, or else, (he should bathe) himself also. (134-135ab)

ityetatsāmayaṁ karma samāsāt parikīrtitam || 135 ||
Thus this, in brief, is said to be the ritual procedure (that concerns a

common) regular (initiate). (135cd)

iti śrīmālinīvijayottare tantre samayādhikāro ‘ṣṭamaḥ || II
See TĀ 15/534-535ab.
' See TĀ 15/610cd-612.

Appendix H
A comparative chart between the tattvas and the Trident Throne

[ḹPhacavae ]_ _ ..s

Batween

[S-Ṛī--+-y
Jes
The lows of Knowledge
wi the
[+-[IHHHPĀḤṈ iuḍurdṭ'tydúvhúṇ

Taamicáṭe
pai) is yl o ūe Mieoai
samṇas)
al e yleo'Tre
Thvaknleige wik bk Ḷe

Śuddhavidys|
UÚalaited
power of acṅoo | shels° e lower shell Ṃ he Warld.
ad'hṭ pa sl
'be Sēī
sṇttv
Te ? gpalie o be aānd eod beĩ,

Pure

opposites. Dhama (Piety). Wisdoan

Úháua) Deciees (Vaxrśṭya]

(Adlaúa.
Çhúay,Aaivaa)
Niniay
The is haats

Ajlin, Atarg,
E][eēḍ IRrTna kNEgyyrrrrrrxrrḺaaI

vit

[ṈPkthkhṂ

paiaa

B

ḸīTNlion __]|

īx-;

v

/ŪTagaa] Ḷaune) TT jaṇa-]
r-i

-— --]|
[1s1

[ĪÚ] yçpgç ]g_Phal—7]| Tmerass |--ki2aḥ
--]

Š| ci.. | -- j
]|
ṭiz ™… [d—Cpaga—{} (aaṇavaiy.) QC-a

n

; .7]|
[ḸQG.hoaa

[Tdsṣaa7} ,Āaakle J ... 7|

.|[CTaua—{ "hM T ṣṣ.. — |
[=-]
L[daaa—]| (,n-Irā/ṈṚWx
) J”
’saaī__7]
[ā.d.

ṂṂ|[ddJaa
——] 6vahhhaa) |__weç___Ṁ]dāīṇoamaovē
___] ianu _] 1 ūṇa aboe ]

AppendixI

A chart of the tattvas and the Trividyā according with MV 4/19-27
Bhairava teachs how the reality principles are distributed in the Three

Vidyās, Parāparā (MV 4/19-23cd), Aparā (4/24) and finally Parā (4/25-27), as
follows.

i| | ṣ | . JṀ, .. .:= .

+

ã ; | |.3

p

|.=


Ãḹ- | . | ..—> ....|
i;: i

i;

{.3

g | | |ṣ

:Ĩ | 248 | . ē | .

ṭ:.i | | £: | 1}d

=

=

rr-
| .4. ] ._ . . 4


ĀHNIKA 16
============================================================

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
--------------------------------------------------

What Needs be Done in the Procedure Concerning
the Apprentice (vidheyaprakriyā vidhau)

Fashioning the Three Knots of the Sacred Thread (sūtrakḷpti), verses lcd- 7ab,

pages 139-143

The Purification of the Principles (tattvaśuddhi), verses 7cd-30, pages 143-144
The Formation of the Mantras that Invoke the Principles, verses 11cd15, pages 145-148

Establishing Consciousness in the Principles and their Worship, verses
16-22ab, pages 148-151
The Power of the Semantics of Mantra, verses 22cd-26ab, pages 151-

The Function of Mantra, verses 26cd-28ab, pages 153-154

Declaration of Intent Should Herald Ritual Action, verses 28cd-30ab,
pages 154-155
Illumining the Body of the Disciple with the Movement of the Breath and

Mantra, verses 30cd-33, pages 155-158
Giving Birth to the Disciple on Increasingly Higher Levels and Worlds with
Trika Mantras and Oblations, verses 34-64, pages 158-168
The Burning of the Fetters (pāśadāhaḥ), verses 65-78ab, pages 168-172
The Conjunction with the Supreme Principle, verses 78cd-91, pages 172-178

The Yoga of the Offering of the Full Oblations

The First Full Oblation, verses 78cd-82, pages 173-174

The Second Full Oblation, verses 83-85ab, pages 174-175

The Third Full Oblation, verses 85cd-91, pages 175-178
Initiation for Worldly Benefits (bhogadikṣā) by means of a Full
Oblation, verses 92-97ab, pages 178-180
Initiation into the Disembodied form of Śiva Beyond the Principles,
verses 97cd-99ab, pages 180-184

Emission of the Pure Principles by Means of a Full Oblation, verses
99cd-102, pages 184-185

The Pure States of the Principles, verses 103-111, pages 185-188

The Senses Bound and Liberated, verses 112-115ab, pages 188-189
Purification of the Principles with Trika Mantras, verses 115cd-117,

pages 189-190

The Various Paths (adhvabheda): The Oblations Required for the Paths, verses

118-122, pages 190-192


ĀHNIKA 17
============================================================

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
--------------------------------------------------

The Brief Initiation (sūkṣmā dīkṣā)

A Brief Direct Initiation Without Outer Supports, verses 1-3ab, pages 193-194
The Required Mantras and Oblations, verses 3cd-7, pages 194-196
The Teacher Must Be Well Qualified, verses 8-9, pages 196-198


ĀHNIKA 18
============================================================

CHAPTER NINETEEN
--------------------------------------------------

The Initiation of the Immediate Exit from the Body (sadyahsamutkramaḥ)
The Initiation Whereby a Dying Man Attains Śiva at the Moment of Death,
verses 1-3, pages 199-200
The Ascertainment of Impending Death (kālāvekṣā), verses 4, page 200
Qualifications for the Initiation of the Immediate Exit from the Body, verses 5-

9, pages 200-203

The Deposition of the Razor (krpāṇyādinyāsaḥ) that Severs the Vital Points,
verses 10-14, pages 203-207
Severing the Vital Centres by the Circulation of the Breath in the Body (cāraḥ
Śśarīragaḥ), verses 15-23ab, pages 207-215
Blocking the Breath by Agitating the Wheels along the Trident of Knowledge,
verses (17-20), pages 215-216
Immediate Exit by Another Mantra, verses (21-23ab), page 217

The Procedure for the Brahmavidyā (hrahmavidyāvidhiḥ)
The Initiation that Brings About the Exit from the Body, verses 23cd31ab, pages 218-220
The Recitation of the Brahmavidyā
The Brahmavidyā Recited by a Fellow Initiate to Liberate Him.
Possible Objections and Response, verses 31cd-39

(39cd-40ab), (47) (47cd-48ab) - (50) (50Ocd-51ab),

pages 220-224
The Liberating Awakening of the Dying Man, verses 40-46 (40cd47ab), pages 224-228
The Dying Man Can Impart the Initiation to Himself, verses 51-55 (51cd-56),
pages 228-230


ĀHNIKA 19
============================================================

CHAPTER TWENTY
--------------------------------------------------

The Initiation Validated by the Scales (tulādīkṣā)
The Inner Purification (antaḥsaṁskāra) , verse 2, pages 231-232

The Burning Seed and the Burning Away of the Three Impurities,
verses 2-7, pages 233-235

The Examination of the Attainment of Competence (adhikāraparīkṣā)

The Initiation that Bears a Sign of Accomplishment, verses 8-1 1ab,
pages 235-236

X

The Procedure Concerning the Scales (tulāvidhi) , verses 11cd-12ab, pages 237-

The Initiation in Which the Purification of Impurity is Apparent by a
Loss of Weight, verses 11cd-16ab, pages 239-243


ĀHNIKA 20
============================================================

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
--------------------------------------------------

The Initiation of Those Absent (pārokṣīdīkṣā)

The Procedure Concerning (Those Who are Absent, Whether) Dead or Alive

(ṁṛtajīvadvidhi), verses 2-5, pages 244-246

Those to Whom the Initiation that Rescues the Dead Can be Imparted, verses 6-

15, pages 246-255

The Media Through Which the Absent Disciple Can be Made Present, verses
16-18ab, pages 255-256
Requirements for the Rite, verses 18cd-22ab, pages 256-257
Placing the Absent Disciple in a Simulacrum, verses 22cd-24, pages 257-259
The Teaching Concerning the Net (iālopadeśaḥ), verses 25-45, pages 259-270
The Examination of the Strength and Weakness of the Group of Purifications
(saṁskriyāgaṇe balābalavicāraḥ), verses 46-61, pages 270-276


ĀHNIKA 21
============================================================

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
--------------------------------------------------

The Extraction of Sectarian Signs (liṅgoddhāra)

Those at a Lower Reality Level who Follow Lower Traditions are Extracted
from There Along with their Sectarian Marks and Led Upwards
Inspired by Grace, verses 2-14ab, pages 277-281
The Proclamation (to the Lord) and (His) Consent (śrāvaṇam cābhyanujñānam),

verses 14cd-19, pages 282-283

Bestowing of One of the Seven Common Śaiva Mantras, verses 20-22, pages

283-284

Purification and Liberation from Sin (śodhanam pātakacyutiḥ), verses 23-28ab,

pages 285-286

Purifying Fire Offering, verses 23-27ab, pages 285-286
Converts Cannot be Full-fledged Teachers, verses 28cd-31ab, pages 286-287
Concerning the Elimination of Doubt (śaṅkhācchedaḥ), verse 31cd, page 287
The Procedure Applicable to Śaiva Teachers of a Lower Order and to those who
are Obscured, verses 31cd-37ab, pages 287-289
Ascertainment of a Disciple’s Competence, verses 37cd-40ab, pages

289-290
Those Initiated in the Siddhāntas and Bhairava Tantras Can be Initiated
into Trika, verses 40cd-42ab, page 291
Taking Initiation from Many Teachers Reinforces Knowledge, verses

42cd-46ab, pages 292-293

Veneration of the One Teacher who Bestows the Highest Knowledge,
verses 46cd-48ab, pages 293-294

xi


ĀHNIKA 22
============================================================

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
--------------------------------------------------

The Consecration of a Teacher
(abhiṣecanam)
Examination of the Competence of the Postulate (parīkṣā)
Qualities Required of a Teacher, verses 2-7, pages 295-297

Defects of a False Teacher, verses 8-10, pages 297-298

The True Teacher, verses 11-12ab, page, pages 298-301
Teachers that Should be Avoided, verses 13cd-16ab, pages 301-302

The Teacher to be Adopted is One with Perfect Knowledge, verses
16cd-17ab, page 302

The Creation of a Teacher (ācāryakaraṇam), verses 17cd-20ab, page

Knowledge is the Sole Sign of Initiation, verses 20cd-22ab, pages 304306
The Seven Sacrifices, verses 22cd-23ab, pages 306-307
Teacher Entrusts Ritual Implements and Authority to Disciple and Follows his
Command, verses 23cd-26ab, pages 307-308
A Knowledgeable Teacher Retains Authority and Must Transmit It, verses

26cd-28, pages 308-310

Teacher’s Duty to Liberate His Disciple, verses 29-30, page 310
The Teachers Mantra Observance (tadvratam) , verses 31-32, pages 311-313

The Yoga of the Vow of the Observance of the Vidyā, verses 33-44ab, pages
313-317

The Removal of Knowledge from a Deceitful Disciple (haraṇaṁ mateḥ) and the
Signs of His Obscuration, verses 44cd-64, pages 317-325

The Teacher Should Help an Obscured Disciple when He Can, verses 65-69,
pages 325-327

Better to Follow an Inferior Doctrine and Give it Up than Give up a Superior
One, verses 70-71, pages 327-328

Only the Teacher Who has Made the Disciple Fall Can Elevate Him Again,

verses 72-75, pages 328-330

A Trika Master is the Highest. If He Dies One Should Take Refuge in Another.
verses 76-77, page 330
Disqualifying Defects in a Teacher and Disciple, verses 78-89ab, pages 331-332

Abandon a Teacher with Pernicious Defects, verses 83-89ab, pages 332334
Those Who are Graced May Remove their Own Obscuration to Some Degree,
verses 89cd-96, pages 334-338
The Categories of those Deceitful Teachers (tadvibhāgaḥ), verses 97-101ab,

pages 338-340

The Consecration Into the State of an Adept (ŚāḌhakatvam), verses 101cd-

103ab, pages 340-341

xii


ĀHNIKA 23
============================================================

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
--------------------------------------------------

The Funerary Rites (antyeṣṭiḥ)

The Qualified Recipient (adhikārin), verses 2-4, 6-1 1ab, pages 342-344

The Rite of Passage (saṁskāraḥ), verses 5, 11cd-16, pages 345-348
The Procedure according to the Kulagahvara, verses 11cd-17ab, pages

348-350

The Procedure according to the Dīkṣottara, verses 17cd-20, pages 350-

Its Purpose (tatprayojanam), verses 21-24ab, pages 353-354


ĀHNIKA 24
============================================================

CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE
--------------------------------------------------

The Fashioning of the Offerings to the Ancestors (śrāddhaklṛpti)

The Purpose of the Rite (prayojanam) and Times when it Should be Performed,

verses 2cd-4ab, page 356

Identifying the Fettered Aspect with the Experient thereby Becoming Śiva,

verses 4cd-9, pages 357-359

No Procedure is Necessary for the Deceased who Knows Reality, verses 10,

page 359

The Days of the Teacher°s Enlightenment and Birth are Sacred Days (parvan),

verses 11-12cd, pages 360-361

The Procedure for the Channels of the Breath (nāḍīvidhiḥ), verses 13-14ab,
19ab-21ab, pages 361-362
The Worship of the Assembly When Performing srāddha for the Ancestors,

verses 14cd-18, pages 363-364

The Bestowal of Worldly Benefits (bhoga) and Liberation (hhogaṁokṣadānam),
verses 21cd-29, pages 365-368


ĀHNIKA 25
============================================================

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
--------------------------------------------------

The Remaining Observance (śeṣavṛttinirūpaṇam)
The Purpose of the Remaining Observance (prayojanaṁ śeṣavṛtteḥ), verse 2,

pages 369-370

Teacher Instructs as to the Daily Conduct, Including Ritual and Mantra, verses
3-20, pages 370-377
Mantras are Letters even so they are Powerless if Drawn from a Book, verses

21-25ab, pages 377-379

The Teacher Imparts Trika Mantras in Secret, verses 25cd-29ab, pages 379-380

The Daily Procedure (nityavidhi), verses 29cd-72, pages 380-398

Worship at the Junctures of the Day (sandhyopāsana), verses 29cd-

37ab, page 380-382

The Regular Worship on the Sacrificial Surface (nityārcā sthaṇḍile),

verses 37cd, page 382

Invocation (āvāhana), verses 37cd-51ab, pages 382-387

xiii
Libation (tarpaṇa), verses 51cd-54ab, pages 388-389

Worship with Whatever Expands Consciousness, verses 54cd55ab, pages 389-390

Rites are Fixed for Those Who Seek Worldly Benefits, Not for

Those Who Aspire to Liberation, verses 55cd-57, pages
389-390

Ritual Action Aimed at Oneness Brought About by Factors that Instil
Bliss, verses 58-61, pages 390-392

Hymn to Inner Worship, verses 62cd-65, pages 392-394

Manner of Worship with this Hymn and Conclusion, verses 66-76,
pages 394-398


ĀHNIKA 26
============================================================

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN
--------------------------------------------------


The Worship of the Liṅga (liṅgārcā)
The Many Kinds of Liṅga (liṅgasvarūpaṁ bahudhā), verse 2, page 399
Higher Secret Mantras should not to be Used Externally, verses 2-8,
pages 400-404
Installation of a Deity by Oneself or by the Teacher, Into a Liṅga
Anywhere or Into an Iconic Representation, verses 9-20ab,
pages 404-407
Deity May be Installed and Worshipped in a Skull, verses 20cd-21ab,
page 407

Characteristics and Features of a Skull, verses 21cd-29, pages 408-413

A Description of the Varieties of Rosaries (akṣasūtranirūpaṇam), verses

30-39, pages 413-417

The Sacrificial Jar, verses 40-43, pages 417-419
Other Supports on which to Worship the Deity, verses 44-49, pages 418-420
The Various Types of Worship (pujābhedaḥ), verses 50-59, pages 421-424

Appendices to Volume Nine
Appendix to Chapter Sixteen: Animal Sacrifice according to Chapter Twenty of
the Netratantra, pages 425-436
Appendix to Chapters Seventeen and Eighteen: The Deposition of the Tattvas,
pages 437-442
Appendix A to Chapter Nineteen: The Sixteen Supports, the Six Wheels, the
Three Targets and the Five Voids, pages 443-451
Appendix B to Chapter Nineteen: Time and the Conquest of Death,
Kubjikāmata chapter 23, pages 452-456
Appendix to Chapter Twenty-two: The Seven Common Mantras, page 457

Abbreviations
APS
ASB

Ajaḍapramātṛṣiddhi
Asiatic Society of Bengal

BLO

Bodleian Library, Oxford

AV

Atharvaveda

BY
BhGī
BhoKā
BrṛUp
ChUp
CMSS

Brahmayāmala
Bhagavadgītā
Bhogakārikā
B,rhadāraṇyakopaṇiṣad
Chandogyopaṇiṣad
Ciñcinīmatasārasamuccaya

Devīdyvardhaśatikā

DhAK

DP
Dhál
GOML

Dharmālaṅkārakārikā

HDh

Devīpañcaśataka
Dhvanyālokālocana
Government Oriental Manuscript Library, University of
Chennai
History of Dharmaśāstra

Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī

IrP
ISMEO

Institut Français d'Indologie de Pondichéry
Istituto Studi Medio ed Estremo Oriente

ĪPVv

ĪŚGDP `

Indo-Īranian Journal

Iśvarapratyabhijñāvivr̥tivimarśinī
Iśānaśivagurudevapaddhati

JA
JASB
JRAS
IY
KED
KIN
KNP
KuKh
KuPa
KhCPS
KM
KṢSS

Journal Asiatique
Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bombay
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society
Jayadrathayāmala
Kashmiri Series Edition
Kaulajñānanirṇaya
Kramanayapradīpikā
Kumārikākhaṇḍa of the Manthānabhairavatantra
Kulapañcaśikā
Khacakrapañcakastotra
Kubjikāmata
Kashmiri Shaiviṣm, the Secret Supreme

KNP
LYV

Kramanayapradīpikā
Laghuyogavāsiṣṭa

MBh

MP
MP (1 Śk)
MP (2 Tri)
MP (3 AS)
MS

Kashmiri Series of Texts and Studies

Mātaṅgaparameśvarāgama
Mahābhārata

Mahānayaprakāśa
Mahānayaprakāśa commented by Śitikaṇṭha
Mahānayaprakāśa by unknown author published in
Trivendrum.
Mahānayaprakāśa by Arṇasiṁha
Manuscript

XV
Mālinīvijayottaratantra

Mālinīvijayavārtika

Monier-Williams
Munṇḍaka Upaniṣad
Mṛgendratantra
Mṛgendratantravṛtti Kriyāpāda

Mṛgendratantra Kriyāpāda

Mṛgendratantra Vidyāpāda
Nepal German Manuscript Preservation Project

Nyāyabindu
Nyāyabindutīkā
Netratantra
Netratantroddyota
Number
Page
Paramokṣaniīrāsakārikā
Parātrīśikā (= Parātriṁśika)
Parātriṁśikavivaraṇa (Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa)

Pāṇini’s Sūtras, the Aṣṭādhyāyī.

Pūrvakāmikā

Paramārthasāra
Pramāṇavārtika

Pramāṇaviniścaya
Pratyabhijñāhṛdaya
Ricerche e Studi Orientali
Rājataraṅginī
Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha
Rgveda

Śatapathabrāhmaṇa

Sarvajñānottara

Sva/ŚSubodhodayamañjarī
Swami Laksmanjoo
Science of Light

Saṁvitprakāśa

Spandakārikā
Spandanirṇaya

Spandapradīpikā
Spandasaṁdoha

Śivasūtra
Śivasūtravimarśinī
Śivastotrāvali
Śrīmatottara

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad
Saṭsahasrasaṁhitā

Somaśambhupaddhati
Svacchandatantra
Svacchandatantroddyota
Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha

State University of New York Press
Siddhayogeśvarīmata
Tattvatrayaparīkṣā
Tantrāloka
Tattvārthacintāmaṇi
Trika Śāstra Rahasya Prakriyā
Tantrasāra
Tantrasadbhāva
Tantroccaya
Taittirīyopaniṣad
Tantravaṭadhānikā
Triśirobhairava

Ūrmikaulāraṇvatantra

Vijñānabhairava
Vāmakeśvarīmata
Vātulanāthasūtra
Yogavāsiṣṭa
Yonigahvaratantra
Upaniṣad
laghu

comm.

guru

Commentary


ĀHNIKA 27
============================================================

CHAPTER SIXTEEN
--------------------------------------------------

The Initiation of the Apprentice
(pautrikaḥ)
‘I bow (to the Rudra called) Balabhadra, whose power (bala) to sever

(bheda) the entire association with the flux of the fetters is auspicious (bhadra).

His power is full by virtue of his skill (in making) the horse of the vital breath

roam.”

Now, after the Initiation into the Rule, he announces (the following)
with the second half of the verse (of which the first half serves to conclude the

previous chapter. He does this) in order to describe the (next possible) future
(successive) initiation (to the status) of a spiritual son (putrakadīkṣā).

qa] ŪīTI ÇTāīd fISTI]_|

ĪTT: 11 g. 1|

TTḤRTRFATĪSJ
TATTT aTĪRTT || 3 1

yadā tu samayasthasya putrakatve niyojanam ḷ
gurukatve sādhakatve vā kartum icchati daiśikaḥ lI 1 II
tadādhivāsaṁ kr̥tvāhni dviṭīye maṇḍalaṁ likhet |
sāmudāyikayāge ‘tha tathānyatra yathoditam || 2 ||
Now, in order to attain the status of a spiritual son (putraka), (we

will proceed) to expound the ritual procedure (vidhi) here (for this, as)

explained by Śiva (Himself).

If the teacher wishes to promote a regular initiate (samayin) to the

status of a spiritual son, adept (sādhaka) or teacher (desśika), then once the
preliminary rite of purification (adhivāsa) has been performed, he should
draw the maṇḍala on the following day, in the manner previously described
for the composite sacrifice (sāmudāyikayāga) and elsewhere. (1-2)
He (now) describes the composite sacrifice.

TRTHTGĀTĪi
JṬIH JĪṬHTHTT 113 1

zāTcṁcēzzajṁś sriTrā ṁ |

' The interior sacrifice (conceming which, see above 15/295cd-365), is called ‘composite
(sāmudayika) in MV 8/80cd. The term ‘composite’ is explained by Bhatta Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha in
MṢT, Kriyāpāda, 891 (p. 151). There he says that the composite sacrifice ‘is to be performed in a
composite manner, that is, with an aggregate of many (component) parts (together in unison)’
(sanudāyenānekāṅga-samāhāreṇa nirvartyā (śuddhiḥ).


ĀHNIKA 28
============================================================

CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT
--------------------------------------------------


sacrificial substances are not available. It should be celebrated once, twice, three or four times a

year: ‘He who, in order to fulfil the command to perform and in order to complete (any) rṅite does

not fashion (and offer) the sacred thread four times or once is without fruit.” PTv p. 236 (see
below, 28/112 ff. for this rite)

Abhinava writes the following in the course of explaining PT 33ab, that declares that

‘he who performs the said rites of worship and keeps the aforementioned sccd syllable (SAUḤ)

correctly in mind, attains perfection.' As usual, he distinguishes practice without outer ritual,

which leads to immediate realization, and one that is gradual, that develops through ritual action

(concerning the former, see note to 5/58cd):

evam anavarataṁ vyavahāreṣy api bījaṁ smarann eva smaraṇād eva kṛtapājāvidhiḥ
prakarṣeṇānyakula-śāstrādiśaivavaiṣṇavāntaśāstrātirekeṇaiva
bhagavadbhairavabhaṭārakarīpasamāviṣṭaḥ
nijaparasaṁvic-camaikāravaśanirmitabhāvakrīdāḍambaro

jīvanmukta eva prathamoktanayena bhavati ity anubhava evāyam āvartate na tv anyat kiṁcid iti

smaraṇam uktam | śrīmataśāstreṣv evam eva

‘˚He who, in this way, even during the affairs of daily life, constantly and continuously
recollects this seed-syllable (SAUḤ), has just by virtue of (that) rcollection completed the rites of
adoration (kṛtapājāvidhi) . . . Penetrated most excellently by lord Bhairava’s nature, that is, in a
manner superior to other scriptures beginning with the Kula ones and ending with the Śaiva and

Vaiṣṇava, and (aware that) the play of (all this) phenomenal existence is fashioned under the sway
of (the experience) of the wonder of his own supreme consciousness, he is one who is liberated in
this life in accord with the manner stated initially. Thus, as it is (the same) experience that recurs
(constantly), not anything else, it is called ‘recollection’. The very same (is taught) in the
venerable Mata scriptures.
upāsakas tv ananupraviṣṭavīryasattāsārahṛdayo ‘pi kramapūjāmāhātmyāt bījaṁ samyak smaran
prāptahr̥dayākhyatattvamantravīryaḥ prakarṣeṇa sidáhyati — kramapūjāmāhātmyād eva

tāratamyātiśayāt svayaṁ vā prasannagurubhaṭārakavadanakamalād vā (p. 270) mantravīryaṁ
hṛdayātmakam āsādayati jīvanmuktaś ca bhavatīti yāvat |
However, the practitioner (upāsaka = kṛtapūjāvidhi) who has not (yet) penetrated into
the Heart, which is the essence of (the very) being of the vitality (of mantra), (but nonetheless)

continuously recollects (this) seed syllable correctly (amyak) and has (gradually) attained the
vitality of Mantra, which is the reality called the Heart, is successful by the glory of (hs) worship
of the liturgy (kramapūjā), and by the excellence (of its) progressive (development) (āratamya).

(So) either by himself or (by the grace that comes from) the lotus face (of his) honourable teacher

who is pleased (with him), he attains the vitality of Mantra, which is the Heart, and becomes one
who is liberated in this life.

atra dvāraparivāragurupījanaṁ guṇaṁ khanḍanáṁḥ ṭatra dehalīápanyāyena naśabdo yojanīyas

tena na guṇam āvahati na vā khaṇḍanām āvahatīty arthaḥ |) vā na vahati tata eva bhaṇapādaiḥ

nyarūpi | atra tu kulaparvāṇi pavitraṁ ceti samyaktvaṁ pūjāvidheḥ .

‘The worship of the door, the attendants and teacher does not bring (special) merit

(guṇa) nor harm (khaṇḍanā) and so has been described by Somānanda. (However,) here (in this

case), the observance of Kula timeṣ of propitiation (parvan) and (the rite of) the sacred thread are

enjoined, because (this is what is meant by) the correctness of (the performance of) the prescribed
(rite of) worship . . PTv p. 269-270


Abhinava quotes the following passages in the PTy p. 272:


kramapūjanamātraṁ ca kulaparvapavitrakaiḥ |

sahātra pūjane proktaṁ samyaktvaṁ trikaśāsane ||

yathoktam

dravyāṇāmiva śārīraṁ [vīryalakṣaṇam] varṇānāṁ sṛṣṭibījakam |

upāsāyāḥ samāpattir vratānāṁ vīravṛttitā |

tathaiva parvamadhye tu kulaparvāṇi śāsane ||

TANTRĀLOKA

Now in order to define what is meant by an occasional rite, he points
out that in relation to other (rites) that are regular, that definition suffers from
such defects as being over-extensive.
Definition of Occasional (naimittika) and Regular Rites (nitya)

frã ṝx afīcā aēzcañataaī ftkza

‘Again, i only the worship of the Krama (kramapūjana) (is performed, it should be
done) with (the offering of) the sacred threads and (the observance of) the Kula times of
propitiation (parvan); it is said here in the Trika teaching that that is ‘propriety° (samyaktva) in

worship. As is said:

Just as (the vital seed) of the body is (the best of all) sacrificial substances; the seed of
creation, (the best) of syllables; the Trika śāstra of all teachings; (so is) Bhairava’s state (of all

forms of) liberation; (amongst the forms of) observance (upāsā), concentration (samāpatti) (is the

best); amongst vows, the conduct of the hero (is the best); in the same way, according to (this)

teaching, such are the Kula days of fulfilment the best amongst the days of fulfilment.

pavitrakaṁ na kurvanti catustridviḥsakr̥t tu ye ||
kulaparva na jānanti teṣāṁ vīryaṁ na rohati |
The sacred thread (is offered) in order to complete all sacrifices. Those who do not
fashion the sacred thread four (times), three (times), twice (or) once (a year), they know not the

Kula days of fulfiment, and their vitality does not develop.
There are two kinds of priṇcipal rites that must be performed. 1) One kind comprises the regular
obligatory rituals. These are called nitya (iiterally ‘regular’), in the sense that (they) 'must be done'
(niyatakāraṇīya). There are other obligatory rites that are occasional [incidental] (nimitta), in the
sense that they should be performed at a fixed, particular imme on special days (niyatakāla = nitya)
when special, elaborate worship is offered. These include special occasions and anniversaries, as
listed in what follows, as well as public festivals, to which Abhinava makes hardly any reference.

2) The other kind of rites are also obligatory, but occur for some particular reason,
occasionally, at no fixed time. Prominent amongst these incidental duties are penances and

reparatory rites (prāyaścitta). Especially important amongst them is the fashioning and offering of
a sacred thread.

3) A third type of rite is optional (kāmya) and is performed for some specific desired

goal. Many of them are outright magic. These are not prominent in the Siddhānta, whereas many

such are described in Garuḍa and Bhūta Tantras, that deal with magical remedies for poison and

exorcism, respectively. The Svacchandatantra, which belongs to the Mantrapīṭha, hardly refers to
them. Conversely, the Bhairava Tantras of the Vidyāpītha are much concemed with them,
although some are more than others. The Jayadrathayāmala teaches a very large number of them.

The more purely Kaula ones teach fewer. Thus, we do not find so many in the Kubjikā Tantras. It
may seem surprising that the Tantrasadbhāva contains a good number, many of which are

markedly black magic. Although these can be Trika rites, as in this example, and Abhinava
acknowledges their efficacy, they do not concem him because, as he says, they are of purely
personal interest to particular individuals with particular needs, and so of no interest to others.
Thus, those to which he does refer

can be performed for the benefit of others or the general good,

as are the rites for pacifying spirts or negative planetary influences (śānti), or those for
nourishment and well-being (puṣṭi) (see above, for a Vedic example, 1/1 16cd-122ab (117-122)).
But most are concerned with bringing others under one’s control (vaśīkaraṇa). They constitute a

standard set of six types. They include the two aforementioned, along with uccāṭana (driving

away), vigraha (creating conflict), stambhana (paralysis), and maraṇa (murder). The only
substantial study is Goudriaan’s ‘Māyā Divine and Human’ (see bibliography).


ĀHNIKA 29
============================================================

CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT
--------------------------------------------------


niyataṁ bhāvi yan nityaṁ tad ity asmin vidhau sthite |
mukhyatvaṁ tanmayībhūtaṁ sarvaṁ naimittikaṁ tataḥ || 2 ||
(If what is meant by) a regular (nitya) (rite) is that it (must
invariably) take place (constantly (nitya)), then in this (kind of) ritual
procedure, its primary (characteristic) is of that nature. Thus, (as no ritual
can be performed all the time,) all (rituals) are occasional.
Surely, if whatever (rite) is fixed (niyata) that is a regular (obligatory
one,) then as it is logically impossible for this fixity to be otherwise, all (rites)
that are of that nature would have to be performed day and night (constantly).

(Thus,) for example, one who is engaged in (ritual) ablution would then never
cease from (doing that,) because of its fixed nature (niyatabhāvi). And that is

not so; (thus, no rite) of any sort would be regular (nitya); (in this sense rather,
all rites) are occasional. Accordingly, he says: ‘thus all (ritual procedures) are
occasional.”

Now it is said that the regular (obligatory) nature (of these) rites is due

to the regulation (niyama) based on the conceived (division) of a day and the

like. Thus, for example, according to what is taught (yathāśaṁsam), the worship
performed at the junctures of the day (sandhyāvandana) is done in the evening
or the morning etc. Thus he says:

3 +zcā ātrcāaī |

ā 131

dinādikalpanotthe tu naiyatye sarvanityatā |

dinamāsarkṣavarṣādinaiyatyād ucyate tadā || 3 ||
As the fixity (of rites) is determined on the basis of the conceived
(division of) day and the like (according to the nature of the rite), because
the month, asterism, and year etc. (during which to perform occasional
rites) are necessarily fixed (and applicable in all cases), then it (can be) said
that (the status of) all (rites) is that of regular ones (which is clearly
absurd).

Read tanmayibhūtaṁ or tanmayibhātiḥ.

In this and the following verse, Abhinava discusses the difference between a regular and an
occasional rite. The first is called ‘nitya’, which literally means ‘constant’ or ‘regular’. The
second kind is called ‘naimittika’, which literally means that it is occasioned by some cause that

arises at a particular time, and that it serves a particular purpose. However, a regular rite also

bears these characteristics. It occurs daily and so its time is fixed, and it serves the purpose of
meeting the initiate’s ritual obligations. Moreover, if nitya is understood in its literal sense as
‘constant’, no rite would qualify, as none are performed (or could be) all the time. So this too is

occasional. Conyersely, most of the so-called ‘occasional’ rites are also regularly rcurrent.

TANTRĀLOKA

Thusṣ, in this way, because the fixity (of rites) is based on the conceived

(division of) day and the like (according to the nature of the rite), all (rites can
be) said to be regular ones.
Having in this way refuted the definition of an occasional rite as
formulated by others, he (now) states his own view.

aśaṅkitavyāvaśyantāsattākaṁ jātucid bhavam |
pramātraniyataṁ prāhur naimittikam idaṁ budhāḥ || 4 ||
(A rite,) the nature of which is not subject to doubt and is
necessary, occurs occasionally, and is not obligatory for all — this, the wise
say, is an occasional (rite).
‘This, the wise say, is an occasional (rite)’. They (define) its
characteristics (as follows). It is one ‘that is not subject to doubt’, that is, (its

form and nature is) certain, and so its nature is such that it is necessary that it

must take place, because by intending to remove (incumbent) impediments (to
that certainty), one is necessarily bound to do so. Surely (one may object), a
regular (rite) is such also, and so here (this definition is) also over-extensive.
Thus, he says that it ‘occurs occasionally’. The meaning is that it is (only
performed) sometimes. Surely (one may object that) the nature of the regular
(rite) is such (also), because it is (performed) at a fixed time. Thus, in that

situation, there is the same defect. Thus he says that it ‘is not obligatory for

all’. The regular (rite) is fixed for (all) four (types of initiate, namely) the

regular one and the rest. This one, however, (is compulsory for just) some. As is
said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):

‘The teacher should perform (all) three (types of rites); that is, the

regular (daily ones) and the rest (i.e. occasional and intentional), whereas the

adept (may perform) just the regular one. For as long as he lives, the other two
(may be performed only) at Śiva’s command.ʼ
Having defined the occasional (rite), he (goes on) by association to
define the regular one also.

fīai frāTaīcritzq
JāT'Ṃa I y4, 11
That is to say that those rites are performed only on certain occasions. The first two

specifications are also applicable to the regular rites. The second two apply only to the occasional
ones.
MV 1/49, also quoted above in TĀv ad 15/524cd-525ab (520cd-521ab).


ĀHNIKA 30
============================================================

CHAPTER THIRTY
--------------------------------------------------

The sole nature of these Mantras, once awakened, is reflective

awareness. (2ab)
Surely, it has been said before many times that reflective awareness can
be the nature only of the agent and Mantras are instruments (not agents in
themselves). So how can it be logically possible for them to be such? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

svatantrasyaiva ciddhāmnaḥ svātantryāt kartr̥āmayāḥ || 2 |I
It is because of the freedom of the abode of consciousness, that is
free (to do anything), that (Mantras) are agents. (2cd)

Surely (one may ask), if this is so, how is it possible for the teacher to
be the agent of the grace of initiation and the like?° With this doubt in mind, he

says:

yam āviśanti cācāryaṁ taṁ tādātmyanirūḍhitaḥ |
svatantrīkurvate yānti karaṇāny api kartṛtām || 3 I
(The Mantras) penetrate into the teacher, and because he is firmly
rooted in a state of identity (with them), they make him a free (agent).
(Thus,) although they are instruments (of ritual action), they become the

agents (of that action).

Surely, if that is so, without an instrument, how could they be agents?
With this doubt in mind, he says that ‘although they are instruments (of ritual

action), they become the agents (of that action)’. Although (Mantras, which

are) the instruments (of ritual action) become agents, they (continue to be)
instruments without their abandoning their state as agents. This is the meaning.
He now describes the form of (these) mantras.

Verses 2-3 are drawn from MVV 2/229cd-231ab. There, instead of vimarśaikasvabhāvakāḥ —
‘the sole nature (of these Mantras) is reflective awarenessʼ, MVV 2/229d reads
vimarśapathavartinaḥ — (these Mantras) are on the path of reflective awareness.

Conceming the nature of the agency of an agent, see above, 9/8-10.
karṭāmayāḥ literally: made of agencyʼ.

If Mantras are agents in themselves, then the successful execution of rituals would be by virtue

of the Mantras alone. The officiant would have no part to play in it.
- MVV 27230c reads tādātmyaniyogataḥ — because (he is) appointed by (his) state of identity

(with them) instead of tādātmyanirūḍhitaḥ — because he is firmly rooted in a state of identity
(with them).

TANTRĀLOKA

The Form of the Mantras (mantrasvarūpa)

The Trident Throne
The Shaft of the Trident

TITYTHI

ādhāraśaktau hrīṁ prthvīprabhṛtau tu catuṣṭaye |
kṣḷāṁ kṣvīī vaṁ kṣam iti prãhuḥ kramãd varṇacatuṣṭayam || 4 |

(The Mantra) HRĪM is within the power of the foundation (of the
Trika Trident). They say that the group of four syllables, KṢḶĀM,

KṢVĪṀ, VAṀ, and KṢAM, is within the four, (the principles) beginning
with Earth, respectively. HAM is in the channel (of the Trident). (4-5a)

Emend kkā to kṣvīṁ, as found in MV 23/13c.
This section, from 4 to 10ab, presents the Mantras for the worship of the Trident Throne. The
printed edition has grouped these verses into one. For the convenience of the reader, 1 am
separating them in accord with parts of the Trident.
The mantras are taught in the MV 23/13-15, of which these verses 4 t0 10ab are an
expanded explanatory paraphrase. The formation of the Throne is described in detai above, in
15/297cd-314. The worship of the deities continues up to 352ab. We observe here, as in many
other cases, that Abhinava also supplies missing information, without which it would not be
possible to understand the procedure taught in the Tantra. Thus, all the MV tells us is this:
‘Now will be taught the etemal seed Mantras (jāti), along with the preceding throne

(āsana) of the group of five, namely, HRĪṀ (read hrīṁ for hīi) KṢLĀM KṢVĪṀ VAMṀ and
KṢAMṀ, in due order.

And (those) of the other group of five, namely, HAṀ YAṀ RAṀ LAṂṀ and VAṀ.
(The phonemes) rM RM IN ḶLṀ and OṀ AUṀ and HAḤ extend up to the beginning of the calix

(of the lotus).
(The consonants) ending with BH are on the filaments, and HAṀ HĀṀ HIṀ HĪṀM
HUM along with HŪṀ HEṀ HAIṀ and HOM are on the petals, and so too, in the same way, the

powers with their own names.

ŚAṀ ṢAṀ (Read śaṁ ṣaṁ for śeṣaṁ) and the Subtle one (SAṀ) are in the three circles

of the Ghost (i.e. Sadāśiva). It is said that one should imagine the letter JRAM be that of the
prongs of the Trident.’ (16) MV 23/13-16
' The mantras at the base of the Trident:

OṀ HRĪṀ ĀDHĀRAŚAKTAYE NAMAḤ (the Foundation)
OṀ KṢLĀṀ DHĀRĀYAI NAṂAḤ (Earth)
OMṀ KṢVĪṀ SURODĀYA NAMAḤ (Water - the Ocean of Wine)
OṀ VAṀ POTĀYA NAMAḤ (Fire — the Boat)
OṀ KṢAṀ KANDĀYA NAṂAḤ (Air— thc Bulb)
Space is not represented in this group. One possible rcason for that is that it is included
in the domain of Ananta that extends up to Kalātattva. Another, perhaps better reason, is that
Spaceis not counted separately from the four elements becauseit pervades them.
''' OM HAṀ ANANTĀYA NĀMAḤ.


ĀHNIKA 31
============================================================

CHAPTER THIRTY
--------------------------------------------------


‘(The principles) beginning with Earth’ are in the Earth, the Ocean of

Wine (Water), the boat (Fire), and in the Bulb (Air) (kanda). According to this,

the seed-syllable of Māyā (HRĪṀ) is in the power of the foundation. Elsewhere
(in the others,) are the navel (KS) along with the left breast (L) and milk (Ā)

(KṢḶĀṀ — Earth), (the navel) conjoined with the throat (V) and nose (Ī)
(KṢVĪṀ — Water, the Ocean of Wine), just (the navel) (KSṢAṀ) (in the Root —
Air), and the throat (VAMṀ) in the boat (Fire). Vitality' (M) is everywhere (at
the end of the syllables).
‘The channel’ is the staff (of the Trident). According to this, the vital
breath (H) is here, along with vitality (Ṁ) (HAṀ).

The Knot of Māyā

3š ar š

d rṁītzaqa|

Ṝ X d q nd®

fTāēTKATT
I 41

yaṁ tathā raṁ laṁ vaṁ dharmãdicatuṣṭaye |

rṁ Rrṁ ḷṁ Ḷṁ catuṣke ca viparītakramād bhavet | 5 II
YAṀ, RAM, LAṀ, and VAM are in the four, Dharma and the rest
(that are in the knot at the base of the three prongs of of the Trident). ṛM,

RM, IM, and LMṀ and in the four (which are their opposites, arranged) in
the reverse order. (Sbcd)
(Dharma and the rest) ‘in the reverse orderʼ, that is, Adharma and the

rest. Here (in this case), according to this, (these four in the forward order
correspond to) the group of four semivowels conjoined to vitality (M) (i.e.

YAṀ, LAṀ, RAṀ and LAṀ), and (in the reverse order to the four) neuter
vowels (i.e. ṛM, ṚRM, IM and ḶM).
The Plinth, the Lotus and the Corpse

Read ojas ca for tejaś ca.


The eight qualities of the mind at the level of Māyātattva:


OM YAṀṂ DHARMĀYA NAMAḤ (SE) (Dharma)

OMṀ RAṀ JÑĀNĀYA NAMAḤ (SW) (Jñāna (knowledge))

OM LAṀ VAIRĀGYĀYA NAMAḤ (NW) (Vairāgya (dispassion))
OṀ VAṀ AIŚVĀRYĀYA NAMAḤ (NE) (Aiśvārya (mastery))

OMṀ IM ADHARMĀYA NAMṂAḤ (E) (Adharma)
OṀ RM AIÑĀNĀYA NAMAḤ (S) (Ajñāna (ignorance))
OM [M AVAIRĀGYĀYA NAMAḤ (W) (Avairāgya (lack of dispassion))

OṀ ḶṀ ANAIŚVARYĀYA NAMAḤ (N) (Anaiśvārya (lack of mastery))

TANTRĀLOKA

oī aurṁh has trayam ity etad vidyāmāyākalātraye |
anusvāravisargau ca vidyeśeśvaratattvayoḥ || 6 |l

The three, OṀ, AUM and HAḤ are in the three (principles of)
Knowledge, (absence of) Māyā, and (absence of) the Force (of limited

agency) (kalā), (respectively).
AṀ and AḤ are within the principles of Vidyeśa and Īśvara.

(The three (principles of pure)) “Kmowledge’, which is the crossroad,

(catuṣkikā) Māyā, which is made of darkness (asūraka), is the lower cover, and

the power (of limited agency) (kalā) is the upper cover. (Pure) Knowledge is the
plane (which is the ground) of the Iśvara principle, that is just next to it, above

it.

Along with that (tena) here are the pair of shanks (AUM) and the vital

breath (H), along with emission (AH) (HAḤ). ‘Vidyeśa’ (here means) the place
which is presided over by the Vidyeśvaras, that is, the Īśvara principle, the form

of which is a lotus. (Here) ‘Iśvara’ is Sadāśiva. The sense is that this is the state
of pervasion in the form of the pure enclosure etc. (śuddhāvaraṇa) etc. within

the calix (of the lotus).

Ṁā īṢSaaTSHga: |

afarzāī zvcazāad ī T ĀṜḷā] | . 1|
TTITĪ Tā-Ṁ- TIIT-TṬĪ
TTVSGGĪŠ |
afrg. Ṁḷ ̄d Ṁ JJṀ] Ṁ̄- T I| ¢ 1|

Ṝ TT;
ṢTHTAT
TTTR-T

kādibhāntāḥ keṣareṣu prāṇo ‘ṣṭasvarasaṁyutaḥ |

'! The Croṣsroad (catuṣkikā) is located the aperture in the back of the palate and cranium. There is
a plinth there that has two coverings. There is a problem here with the identity of these three
levels. Just below them is the group of eight, consisting of Dharma etc., that are located at the
upper extremity of the shaft of the Trident. This is where Ananta resides, and s0 corresponds t©
the level of the priṅciple of Māyā. If that is correct, the plinth should mark the beginning of the
pure principles, that is, Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyā). Jayaratha apears to confirm ths, saying
that (Pure) Knowledge is the plane (which is the ground) of the śvara principle that is juṣṭ next
to it above it. This then should be the plinth, which is also called the crossroad. However,
according to Jayaratha, we should break up the compound vidyāmāyākalātraye into the three Vidyā, Māyā and Kalā. This is confusing. We would expect Māyā and Kalā to be below the
pliṅth, not on it.Better then is t© read the three components as being ‘Amāyā’ and ‘Akalā’, that is,
the absence of Māyā and limited agency. Then we may consider the ‘coverings' on the pliṅth ta
be aspects of Pure Knowledge.

OṀ HAḤ ŪRDHVACHADANĀYA NAṂAḤ (Upper covering (power of limited agency))
OṀ AUṀ ADHAŚCHADANĀYA NAMAḤ (Lower covering. Māyā)
OṀ OMṀ VIDYATATTVĀYA NAMAḤ (Plinth. Vidyā (power of of imited knowledge)
On the coverings of the plinth is a lotus, which is Īśvaratattya, within which reside the

Vidyeśvaras. Their mantras are:

OMṀ AṀ VIDYEŚVAREBHYO NAMAḤ

OMṀ AḤ ĪŚVARATATTVĀYA NAMAḤ


ĀHNIKA 32
============================================================

CHAPTER THIRTY
--------------------------------------------------


sabinduko daleṣv asṣṭasv atha svaṁ nāma dīpitam | I 7 I|
śaktīnāṁ nayakasya syāc chaṣasā maṇḍalatraye |
sabindukāḥ kṣmaṁ prete jūṁ śūlaśṛṅgeṣu kalpayet || 8 II
prṛthagāsanapūjāyāṁ kramān mantrā ime smṛtāḥ |
(The twenty-four phonemes) from K to BH are (each in one of the

twenty-four) stamens (of the lotus). (7ab)

The vital breath (H) conjoined (successively) with the eight vowels

along with bindu is in the eight petals. The names of the nine powers are
energized (dīpita) (by the mantra OṀ). Ś, S, S, together with the Point
(bindu),is in the three circles. (7cd-8ab)
KṢMAM is in the Ghost (i.e., Sadāśiva). One should imagine that

JRAM is on the prongs of the Trident. These are said to be, one by one in
due order, the Mantras (required) for the worship of the Throne. (8cd-9ab)
(The phonemes) ‘from K to BH” are twenty-four. _There is one

phoneme for each filament. The vital breath is the letter H. A

ĀII U Ū E AI are

Each of the eight petals of the lotus has three filaments. Thus, there are three for each of the

eight dircctions, primary and secondary. The letters on the filaments starting from the eastern
petal are:

KAṀ, KHAṀ, GAṀ (E) GHAṀ, ṄAṆI, CAMṀ (SE)
CHAM, JAṀ, JHAṀ (S) ṄAṀ, TAṀ, ṬHAṀ (SW)
ḌAṀ, DHAṀ, ṆAṀ (W) TAṀ, THAṀ, DAMṀ (NW)
DHAMṀ, NAṀ, PAṀ (N) PHAṀ, BAṀ, BHAṀ (NE)
The names of the yoginīs are lited above in 8/338 (338cd-339ab) and in 15/305-397. HOM is
the mantra of the power in the centre of the lotus (ṂV 23/15, where in the third pāda there should
read hūĩ heĩ haiṁ hoṁ for huṁ heṁ hai). Thus, the mantras of the yoginīs on the petals of the
lotus, clockwise beginning with the castem petal, are:
OMṀ HAṀ VĀMĀYAI NAMAḤ (E)
OṀ HĀṀ JYEṢṬHĀYAI NAMAḤ (SE)
OMṀ HIṀ RAUDR̥YAI NAMAḤ (Ś)
OMṀ HĪṀ KĀLYAI NAMAḤ (SW)
OṀ HUṀ KALAVIKARAṆYAI ṄAMAḤ (W)

OṀ HŪṀ BALAVIKARAṆYAI NAMAḤ (NW)
OṀ HEṀ BALAPRAMATHANYAI NAMAḤ (N)
OṀ HAIṀ DAMANYAI NAMAḤ (NE)

OṀ HOṀ MANONMANYAI NAMAḤ (centre)
'Ś See above, 15/307. Cf. MV 23/16ab: maṇḍalatritaye śeṣaṁ (>śaṣam) sīūkṣmaṁ (i.e. sa)

pretasya kalpayet |


The mantras of the parts of the lotus:


Petals- Sun: OM ŚAṀṂ ṢŪRYAMAṆḌALĀYA NAMAḤ
OṀ ŚAṀ SŪRYAMAṆḌALĀDHIPATAYE BRAHMAṆE NAMAḤ
Stamens - Moon: OM SAṀ SOMAṂAṆḌALĀYA NAMAḤ
OṀ ṢAṀ SOMAMANDALĀDHIPATAYE VIṢṆAVE NAMAḤ
Calyx — Fire: OM SAṀ AGNIMAṆḌALĀYA NAMAḤ
OṀ SAṀ AGNIMAṆḌALĀDHIPATAYE RUDRĀYA NAMAḤ

Lying within the lotus is the Great Ghost (mahāpreta), who Sadāśiva. His mantra is: OṀ
KṢMAṀ MAHĀPRETĀSANĀYA NAMAḤ.

The mantta of the proṅgs of the Trident OM JRAṀ ŚŪLAŚR̥ṆGEBHYO NAṂAḤ.

TANTRĀLOKA

the eight vowels. Saying that there are nine (powers) entails this, namely, that

the vital breath (H) conjoined with the ninth vowel (O) is in the calix also. That

is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):

‘(The consonants) ending with BH are on the filaments, and HAM

HĀMṀ HIṀ HĪM HUṀ HŪṀ HEṀ HAIṀ and HOM are on the petals, and so
too, in the same way, the powers with their own names.”

‘The three circlesʼ, that is to say, along with their presiding deities, are

the Circle of Fire, within which is the genitals (Ś); that of the Sun, in which is

the belly (S); and that of the Moon, within which is the living being (S). “On the
Ghost (i.e. Sadāśiva) are the navel (KS) and the hip (M), conjoined with

vitality (M) (KSMAṀ). The trident (J) along with the Point and the statf (RAMṀ)

(JRAM) ‘is on the prongs of the Trident’.

The Abbreviated Rite

JṬTJST T JTIRTTT

āĪTT 1 8. 1A

JTTRIĀTHĀNTTFTĀĪTRYḺPGTR̥TTT-TJT|I

saṁṂkṣepapūjane tu prāg ādyam antyaṁ ca bījakam || 9 ||
ādāyādhāraśaktyādi śūlaśṛṅgāntam arcayet |
In the abbreviated rite of worship, (the parts of the Trident)
beginning with the power of the foundation and ending with the prongs of
the Trident can be worshipped (all together,) assuming the first and the last

seed syllable Mantra. (9cd-10ab)

‘The first’ is the seed-syllable of Māyā (HRĪṀ), that denotes the power
of the foundation, and ‘the last’ is the syllable JRAṀ. Thus the abbreviated
Mantra (ūha) (for the Trident as a whole is) HRIṀ JRAṀ ĀṢANAPAKṢĀYĀ

NAMAḤ.

Ratiśekhara Bhairava Mantra

TrārTRr̥āādTṃ'sēaTṀTTGGRĀ I 2 ||

agnimārutapṛthvyambusaṣaṣṭhasvarabindukam || 10 l|
ratiśekharamantro ‘sya vaktrāṅgaṁ hrasvadīrghakaiḥ |

"MV 23/15.

According to Jayaratha, the mantra of the entire Trident Throne is: ON HRĪṀ JRAṀ
ĀṢSANAPAKṢĀYA NAMAḤ.

Read jraṅkāraṁ for jūṁkāraṁ.

Read jraṁ for jīi.


ĀHNIKA 33
============================================================

CHAPTER THIRTY
--------------------------------------------------

The Mantra of Ratiśekhara (consists of) Fire (R), Air (Y), Earth (L)

and Water (V), along with the sixth vowel (Ū) and the Point. His faces and
limbs (are formed) with the short vowels (A I U E O) and the long ones (Ā

I Ū AI AU), respectively. (10cd-11ab)

Ratiśckhara is the Bhairava of Parāparā. His mantric form is: RYLVŪṀ. This Mantra, as is
generally the case, is presented in the Mālinī code in the MV. There we read:
raktatvaṅmāṁsamūtrais tu vāmakarṇavibhũṣitam |

binduyuktaṁ prameyotaṁ ratiśekharam āḍiśet I

‘Fashion (the mantra of) Ratiśckhara with the blood (R (of the goddess Mālinī), the
skin (Y), flesh (L), and tendons (V); adorned with the left ear (Ū), it is threaded through with the
objectivity (prameyota) conjoined with the point (M).’ MV 9/35
Abhinava helps his reader by encoding the Mantra in the commonly familiar Mātṛkā

code, as he does in numerous other such instances. See, for example, the extraction of the Mantra
of Bhairavasadbhāva below in 30/16cd-17ab.

The faces of polycephalic deities represent aspects of their personality and nature, often derived
from other deities they have assimilated, or varieties of forms they have assumed. Their limbs are

their powers. Mantras, their sonic bodies, analogously, are said to possess limbs and faces. The

faces are usually five or six, as are the limbs. The faces are arranged in the directions and named
accordingly, the eastern face etc. The limbs are the Heart (hṛdaya), Head (śiras), the Topknot

(Śikhā), thē Armour (kavaca), the Eye (netra), and the Weapon (astra). The Eye is the third eye or
the pair of eyes. This limb is sometimes omitted. See above, 22/20-21 and note; also below,
30/40cd-41ab.

The six limbs represent the qualities of the deity. For example, they are Śiva’s

omniscience (sarvajñatā), contentment (tṛpti), beginningless knowledge (anādibodha), freedom
(svatantratā), unobstructed power (aviluptaśakti), and infinite power (ananta śakti) (see SvTu ad
1/64-65ab). According to SŚP, the attribution of limbs to the deities, a procedure called

sakalīkaraṇa - completing by the addition of parts' — generally follows after the four rites of

invocation, installation, presence and detention of the deity (see above, 27/11, note). It is done so

that the deity is worshipped in its complete form. The SŚP explains: ‘just as the sun is invincibly
powerful by virtue of its fierce rays, so too the Supreme Lord (parameśvara) is visualized with his
limbs. The Heart is his power of consciousness (cicchakti). The Head is his eightfold sovereignty
(as the eight yogic powers, see above, 8/264-271 and note). The Topknot, above all others, is his

independence and lordliness. The Armour mentioned previously is (his) brilliance, the weapons of
his enemies cannot penetrate. His Weapon is his ardour, which is impossible to bear, that

eliminates (every) obstacle. (SŚP, 3/71b-74a).

The faces and limbs, especially the limbs, can be considerably elaborated by
representing them as fully formed deities with their own mantras and modalities. Kubjikā’s six
limbs is a good example. Generally, however, the mantras of the faces and limbs of a mantra are

formedin a simple, uniforn way. The mantra is first stipped ofits final vowel, along with its

anuṣvāra or visarga. Then the six limbs are formed by adding the six long vowels — Ā, T, Ū, AI,
AU and AH, and the faces by adding the short vowels - A, I, U, E, and O. Anusvāra (Ṁ)is added

to all of them except the Weapon, which ends in visarga (H) (see Brunner 1986: 102). They are
often prefixed with the praṇava OṀ or other seed syllables that are prominent in a particular
tradition. Krama mantras are prefixed with the syllable KHPHR̥ÉṀ or just PHREṀ. Kubjikā
mantras begin with the Five praṇavas ~ AIṀ HRĪM ŚRĪṀ KHPHREṀ HSAUḤ.
Concerning the formation of faces and limbs of Śaiva mantras, see Brunner-Lachaux
(1986a: 89-132) and Rastelli (2001: 319-395) for the equivalent in Vaiṣṇava Pāñcarātra, which is

practically the same.
Ratiśekhara’s mantra is RYLVŪMṀ. The ‘stem’ of the syllable is RYLV; the limbs are formed in
the standard way, by inflecting the six long vowels ending with anusvāra for the first five, and
visarga for the last one. Each one is preceded by the default syllable OM and followed by the

name of the limb in the dative, and one of the six classes of invocations (jāti) NAMAḤ etc. (see
below, 30/43cd-45ab). The mantras of the five faces are formed by conjoining the five short

TANTRĀLOKA

Fire is R, Air is Y, Earth is L, Water is V, and the sixth vowel is Ū (thus
the mantra of Ratiśekhara is RYLVŪMṀ). The five short (vowels) are A I U F

and O. The six long ones are Ā Ī Ū AI AU and AH. He is indicating in this way

by saying this, that (the letters) are those of the (corresponding) faces and limbs
(of the deity) coming down (serially) in this way.

Navātmā Bhairava Mantra

TTTTTTIĪTTTRRATGJTĀTṬHHJT I 22 1
ṭṭtz-̄ḷcc-tGEeE+k; HṀ-CEIḺEH
agniprāṇāgnisaṁhārakālendrāmbusamīraṇāḥ || 11 II
saṣaṣṭhasvarabindvarãdhacandrãdyāḥ syurnavātmanaḥ |
(The Mantra) of Navātmā consists of Fire (R), the Vital Breath (H),
Fire (R), Withdrawal (KS), Time (M), Indra (L), Water (V), Air (Y), the
sixth vowel (Ū), the Point and the Half-Moon etc. (I1cd-12ab)
(The phonemes that constitute Navātmā are as follows). Fire which is R,
the Vital Breath which is H, Fire which is R, Withdrawal which is KS, Time
which is M, Indra which is L, Water which is V, Air which is Y, and the sixth

vowel, which is Ū.”

vowels to the base preceded by the syllable OṀ, followed by the names of thc five faces in the
dative and the salutaton NAMĀḤ. We arrive at the following.
The Limbs of Ratiśekhara

OṀ RYLVĀṀ HṚDAYĀYA NAṂAḤ
OṀ RYLVĪṀ ŚIRASE SVĀHĀ

OṀ RYLVŪMṀ ŚIKHAYAI VAUṢAT
OṀ RYLVAIṀ KAVACĀYA HUM
OṀ RYLVAUṀ NETRĀYA VAṢAT
OṀ RYLVAḤ ASTRĀYA PHAṬ
‘The Faces of Ratiśekhara

OMṀ RYLVAṀ ŪRDHVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (Upper)
OMṀ RYLVIṀ PŪRVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (E)
OṀ RYLVUṀ DAKṢIṆAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (S)
OṀ RYLVEṀ UṬṬARĀVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (N)
OṀ RYLVOMṀ PAŚCIMAVAKTRĀYA NAṂAḤ (W)
This same form of Navātman — RHRKṢMLVYŪṀ - is extracted using the Mālinī code in MV
8/22-23. The formation of the limbs and faces of Navātman is taught below in 30/15-16ab.

Navātmān is an important Mantra. From as far back as the Brahmayāmala, which is the one of

carliest Bhairava Tantras, it is serves as the sonic body of Bhairava. It is also an important seed

syllable for the Saiddhānúika Niśvāsatattvasaṁhītā, which is the oldest known Śaivāgama. It s the
seed syllable of Svacchandabhairava, according to the Svacchandatantra, and some centuries
later, it is Kubjikā’s Bhairava. Here Navātman is the Bhairava of Aparā. His mantric form is given
in the Mālinī code in MV 8/21d-23ab, which Abhinava has replaced here with the easier

Śabdarāśi. It is RHRKṢMLVYŪṀ. It has several variant forms. For example. in the Śrīvidyā

says:


ĀHNIKA 34
============================================================

CHAPTER THIRTY
--------------------------------------------------


The Point and the rest are taught elsewhere in another way. Thus he

&̄IhīTṁTHīgaadrTāTTT&IITTTI-TA

hī |

bindunādādikā vyāptiḥ śrīmattraiśirase mate || 12 II
kṣepākrānticidudbodhadīpanasthāpanānyatha |
tatsaṁvittis tadāpattir iti saṁjñābhiśabditā || 13 II
etāvatī mahāvyāptir mūrtiṭvenātra kīrtitā |
In the venerable Traiśirasa Mata, the sphere of pervasion of the
Point, Sound and the rest is termed as follows. 1) Casting Forth (kṣepa), 2)
Entering

Within

(ākrānti),

3)

the

Awakening

of

Consciousness

(cidudbhoda), 4) Energization (dīpana), 5) Establishment (sthāpanam), 6) its
Consciousness (sarvitti), and 7) the achievement of that (tadāpatti). (This)

Great Pervasion, which is so extensive, is here praised as the Body (miūrti)

(of the deity). (12cd-14ab)

1) Here the pervasion of the Point comprises the Half-Moon up to the

Obstructress. After that, what refers to Sound. In this way, it is said (in the

Svacchandatantra) that ‘the Point is itself Īśvara.’ (According to the

Iśvarapratyabhijñā, where the Point is equated with the Īśvara principle) ‘Iśvara
is the opening outwards (unmeṣa) (of the pulsation of consciousness to

become all things). In accord with this teaching, the outer unfolding (of
object

) and its true nature (is experienced) within ĪIśvara’s state, (in which

the experience is “all this universe am I”). Thus, it is called ‘Casting Forth’
(kṣepa).

‘one

2) Again, concerning Sound, (it is said in the Svacchandatantra that)

should

say

Iśvarapratyabhijñā,)

that

Sadāśiva

is

within

Sound.™

(And

in

the

ʻSadāśiva is the closing inwards (nimeṣa) (of the

withdrawal of objectivity into the subjectivity of consciousness experienced as

rcpertoirc of mantras, we find the female HSKṢMLVRYIṀ, along with the male
SHKṢMḶVRYŪMṀ. The six limbs of Navātmā are described below in 30/15-16ab.
. Theṣe planes correspond respectively to 1) the Point (bindu), 2) Sound (nāda), 3) the End of
Sound (nādānia), ) Power (śakti), 5) the Pervasive One (yyāpinī) 6) the Equal One (With Mind)
(samanā) and 7) the Traṇsmental (ummanā). The Half-moon and the Obstructress after the Point,
that we normally find in this sries, are missing. See above, 6/161, note.
It appears that these verses and the following one are a misplaced digression. but this is
not so. Abhinava is referring to the sonic energies of Navātman here, and in the following vers
to the sense of completing its limbs and those of other mantras with ‘namal..
SYT 4/264d.
ĪP 3/1/3a. Alṣo quoted above ad 11/28. Sce note to TĀv ad 4/140, and Jayaratha’s explanation
in TĀv ad 6/39cd-40ab.
ṢYṬ 4/265b.
IP 3/1/3b.

TANTRĀLOKA

“I am all this”). According to this teaching, the nature (of Sound) is the inner

transition (into consciousness) of the universe that has poured forth externally,
and so (is called) Entering Within (ākrānti).

3) Similarly also, by the submergence of objectivity into the End of
Sound, which is the emergence of subjectivity, consciousness which is the
subject awakens and so it is called the Awakening of Consciousness
(cidudbhoda).

4) In the same way, awakened consciousness increases on the plane of
Power (which is therefore called ‘Energized’) and
5) when it increases in some way also within the Pervasive One, such is

its Establishment.

6) That which for Yogis is the direct experience of that on the plane of

the Equal One (and so is called Consciousness),
7) that is called oneness on the plane of the Transmental. (The Great
Pervasion is) ‘so extensive’, that is (it extends) up to the attainment of oneness

with the Transmental. As is said there (in the Triśirobhairavatantra) beginning
with:
‘1) Casting Forth (kṣepa), 2) Entering Within (ākramaṇa), 3)
Awakening of Consciousness (cidudbhoda), 4) Energization (dīpana), 5)

Establishment (sthāpana), 6) Consciousness (sarṁvitti) and 7) the attainment of
that — O beautiful damsel of the gods, it is said in this scripture that the Body (of
the deity) (māurti) is of seven kinds, by virtue of the succession of the causes
and the relationship (between them) as the sustainer and the sustained.’

‘It is said that 1) Casting Forth is the Point, and 2) Entering Within
(ākrānti) is said to be Sound. 3) The Awakening of Consciousness (cidudbhoda)

is the supreme state, and 4) Energization (dīpana) is said to be Power. 5)
Establishment (sthāpana) is said to be the Pervasive One, 6) Consciousness
(saṁvitti) is said to be the Equal One, and 7) the Transmental is the attainment

of that. This is said to be the Body (of the deity).’

Such extensive pervasion is not only that of the Body (of the deity); it is

also that of the desired salutation as the energizer of Mantra. Thus, he says:

TTSI: 3STTĪ || Q%II
pariṇāmas tallayaś ca namaskāraḥ sa ucyate || 14 ||
‘Salutation’ is the transformation (of consciousness that takes place
by bowing to a venerated being) and merger (into it by becoming one with
it). (14cd)
This pervasive presence (in many Mantras) as a (member of a) class (of
Vedic) invocations (jāti), well known everywhere (in the Tantras) is said to be

The term jāti has been translated as ‘inflecton’ (Goodall and lsaacson 2016: 5) The word ‘jāti
literally means a ‘class' or ‘type’. In this context, it denotes a class of invocations that have been
imported into the early Tantras from the Vedic aplication of Mantra, and with them this term.


ĀHNIKA 35
============================================================

CHAPTER THIRTY
--------------------------------------------------


‘saḷutation’. It is a ‘transformation’ (that takes place) because of the oneness

he who (bows) in salutation (attains) by abandoning (his) embodied subjectivity
and thereby assuming the subjectivity of consciousness, which is like a
transformation. Even though this is so, it is not impossible for him to fall from
(that) reality level (tattva), and so (in order to stress that that state has been

consolidated,) he says (that it is a state of) ‘mergerʼ.

The Faces and Limbs of Navātman

r̥JITTī eTāTT āa-āīVGT T --T I 2, I

eJmaT®īvīzq āraṁrzfāōz+:

eṣa tryarṇojjhito ‘dhastād dīrghaiḥ ṣadbhiḥ svarair yutaḥ |

saḍ aṅgāni hṛdādīni vaktrāṇy asya ca kalpayet || 15 II
kṣayaravalabījais tu dīptair binduvibhūṣitaiḥ |

Omitting the last three (letters of Navātmā), one should fashion
(his) six limbs, that is, the Heart and the rest, with the six (letters that
follow), conjoined with the six long vowels. (His) faces should be fashioned

with the energized seeds KS, Y, R, V, and L and decorated with the Point.
(15-16ab)

They aree NAMAḤ, SVĀHĀ, VAṢAT, HUṀ, VAUṢAT and PHAT. Although Vedic, they are
fundamental features of the majority of Tantric Mantras, as they are usually added, as we have

just noted, to the limbs ofa Mantra (see above, note 30,27; for an extensive discussion of the jātis
in relation to the limbs, see Dyczkowski 2009: vol. 5 note 15 p. 197-200). The Kubjikā tradition,
aware no doubt of their Vedic character, prides itself in being without them, and so more

thoroughly Tantric. But although there are statements to that effect (see KuKh 68120-122),

nonetheless, they do regularly appear as concluding markers of the ‘limbs` of the mantras of that
tradition, as normally happens in general, thus underscoring their importance and power. See
Dyczkowski 2009: 2, 260-262, KuKh 10/32 note 23.

°MV reads jātibhedena for vaktrāṇy asya ca.
The six limbs of Navātmabhairava are HĀṀ RĪṀ HŪṀ KṢAIṀ MAUṀ and LAḤ. The five
faces are KṢAṀ YIṀ RUṀ VEṀ and LOṀ.

The Limbs of Navātman

OMṀ RĀṀ HṚDAYĀYA NAMAḤ
OMṀ HIṀ ŚIRASE SVĀHĀ

OMṀ RŪṀ ŚIKHAYAI VAṢAṬ
OMṀ KṢAIṀ KAVACĀYA HÚM
OM MAUṀ NETRĀYA VAUṢAT
OM LAḤ ASTRĀYA PHAṬ

The Faces of Navātman:


OṀ KṢAṀ ŪRDHVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (Upper)
OMṀ YIM PŪRVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (E)
OṀ RUṀ DAKṢINAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (S)
OṀ VEM UTTARAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (N)
OMṀ LOM PAŚCIMAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (W)

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Omitting the last three (letters of Navātmā), it is devoid of these

three, namely, V, Y and Ū (so H, R, H, KS, M and L remain). The seed-

syllables conjoined with the five short (vowels) are Space (KS), Air (Y), Fire

(R), Water (V) and Earth (L). According the earlier (teachers,) they are

‘energized’ because the short (diphthong) letters beginning with E (i.e. E and

0) and the short vowels beginning with A (i.e. A I U) are fiery by nature, and
so are made of radiant energy (tejas). (But) according to the venerable

Lakṣmaṇagupta, (it is because they) have the letter R (added to them). As

scripture (āgama) says:

‘1) The supreme seed-syllable is the twenty-sixth. It is conjoined with
the letter R and has a Point. O Pārvatī, this is the eastern face of Maheśa and the
goddesses (KSRAM. 2) The right face of the host of the goddesses and gods has

the form of Bhairava. It ends with (the letter) at the end of the end of M. It has a

Point and the letter R (YRAM). 3) Again, the great seed syllable of Indra is the

auspicious twenty-eighth. It has the letter R and is conjoined with the Point
(LRAṀ). 4) The auspicious western face (is that of) the supreme seed syllable

of Varuṇa that is conjoined with (R) the seed of Fire (VRAMṀ). 5) the Point is
conjoined on the head (of the seed syllable) of the auspicious northern face

Lakṣmaṇagupta, who may or may not be the Lakṣmaṇagupta who taught Abhīnava Pratyabhjñā
(see above, 1/1) was mentioned above in TĀv ad 15/2545cd-246ab. There t00, he is presented by
Jayaratha as holding a diferent view concerning the structure of a mantra. There, the proponent of
the accepted view, we are told, is Śambhunātha.

These are the syllables of the five faces of Navātman, set in the five cardinal directions. Indra’s
direction is normally the east, but in this case, it is very clearly stated that the eastern face is that

of Maheśa. Normally, north follows south. However, the text tells us that the fifth face is Utara,
meaning either ‘north’ or ‘above’. The former meaning is the common one, but makes no sense
here. The Upper face is normally listed at the end (cf. Dyczkowski 1986: 31). Thus, following the
normal sequential order, as there is no reason not to, ] arrive at the following table:
The Five Faces of Navātmabhairava

Direction of the Face |_Deity _]Scd syllable | Ēlement
East
Maheśa
|_KṢRAṀ
Space
South
Bhairava | _YRAṀ

North
Indra
LRAM
Earth
West
Varuṇa

Water
Ūpper

Fire

Note that the sequence of the letters in Navātman corresponding to the five elements is, as
Jayaratha noṭes, the normal one: Space (KS), Air (Y), Fire (R), Water (V) and Earth (L.).
According to the text Lakṣmaṇagupta followed, all of the seed-syllables, each

corresponding to one of the five gross elements, incorporates the letter ‘R’, which represents fire.
This, he maintains, is the reason for their power and brilliance.


ĀHNIKA 36
============================================================

CHAPTER THIRTY
--------------------------------------------------

Bhairavasadbhāva Mantra

IRRTTTTII:: āḤTRĀTHTGAT: II QĒ I

ũy sraaīāzgrzrīfefārfr:|

JTTḤ TṬETaT |I| 2 1I

jhakārasaṁhr̥iprāṇāḥ saṣaṣṭhasvarabindukāḥ || 16 ||
eṣa bhairavasadbhāvaś candrārdhādivibhūṣitaḥ |
mātr̥kāmālinīmantrau prāg eva samudāhṛtau || 17 |I
The letter JH, Withdrawal (KS) and the Vital Breath (H), along
with the sixth vowel (Ū) and the Point — (JHKṢHŪM); this is (the mantra)

Bhairavasadbhāva, adorned with the Half-Moon and the rest. The
Mantras of Mātṛkā and Mālinī were taught previously. (16cd-17)

The letter JH is considered the right finger (of the goddess Malinī).

Withdrawal is KS, the Vital Breath is H, and the sixth vowel, U. (The Mantras

of Mātṛkā and Mālinī) ‘were taught’ (previously,) in Chapter Fifteen.
Gaṇeśa Mantra

TJTJīfRg ārāī: āaāīstsi aj
ā I 2¢ 1

-īTHRIRHTĀĪĪTRITRCĪTTT|

gdTrH Ṁ̄ĨḤĨ TṀṀTṬATTSSAÃI| 28 |
Bhairavasadbhāva is the parner of Parā. His mantric form is extracted in the MV, as usual, in
the Māliṅī code (in MV 8/33-34ab). Here again, in 16cd-17cd, Abhinava presents the same in the
better known Śabdarāsi code (cf. above, note t© 30/10cd-11ab). The Mantra is: JHKṢHŪṀ. His
limbs, according to the MV, are formed in the same way as the faces of the mantra, described
previously.

The Limbs of Bhairavasadbhāva:


OṀ JHKṢHĀṀ HRṚDAYĀYA NAMAḤ

OM JHKṢHĪṀ ŚIRASE SVĀHĀ

OM JHKṢHŪṀ ŚIKHAYAI VAṢAṬ
OM JHKṢHAIṀ KAVACĀYA HUṂ
OMṀ JHKṢHAUṀ NETRĀYA VAUṢAT
OM JHKṢHAḤ ASTRĀYA PHAṬ

The Faces of Bhairavasadbhāva:


OM JHKṢHAṀ ŪRDHVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (Upper)
OMṀ JHKṢHIṀ PŪRVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (E)
OMṀ JHKṢHUṀ DAKṢIṆAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (S)
OMṀ JHKṢHEṀ UTTARAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (N)

OMṀ JHKṢHOMṀ PAŚCIMAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (W)
See above, 15/15cd-145.

TANTRĀLOKA

oṅkāro ʻtha caturthyantā saṁjñā natir iti kramāt |
gaṇeśādiṣu mantraḥ syād bījaṁ yeṣu na coditam || 1 8 I
nāmādyakṣaram ākārabinducandrādidīpitam |
sarveṣām eva bījānāṁ tac caturdaśaṣaṣṭhayuk || 19 ||
The mantra of Gaṇeśa and others consists of the syllable OM, the
name (of the deity) in the dative, and the word ‘salutation’ (i.e. NAMAHḤ),
in that order. The seed-syllable amongst them, which is not mentioned (in
the Mālinīvijayottara), consists of the initial letter of (their) name, energized
by the letter Ā, the Point and the Half-Moon etc. AIl the seed-syllables (may

be) conjoined with the fourteenth (AU) and sixth (vowel) (Ū). (18-19)

(Their seed-syllable) ‘is not mentioned’ in the Mālinīvijayottara. Thuṣ,

the execution (prayoga) (of the Mantra) is OM GĀṀ GAṆESĀYA NAMAḤ
or, for example, OM VĀṀ VĀGĪŚVARYAI NAMAḤ. ʻThat initial letter of
(his) name is (conjoined with) the fourteenth (vowel) AU and the sixth (vowel)

Ū. Thuṣ (we arrive at the form) GŪAUM® (for the seed syllable of Gaṇeśa).
Parāparā Vidyā

aṛaṁ ē a+x fēzaṁaṁ 20 1
ṬĪCĀĪTTrTJT HTRTT-TTṬ |
fkcī-at-rṁsāR
UPĀTAR T aII |M 32 |

sfīravīgaī vaaaāqjā ḷ gaĩai || 32 1
3JBīTTTTAT

fāraī sīrakēra
āmantritānyaghoryāditritayasya kramoditaiḥ |
bījair visargiṇī māyā huṁ hakāro viṣargavān || 20 ||
punar devītrayasyāpi kramād āmantraṇatrayam ḷ|
dvitīyasmin pade ‘kāra ekārasyeha ca smṛtaḥ || 21 ||

The worship of Gaṇesa is, of course, essential. For that reason, it is univyersally common to all

traditions, as is the basic form of his Mantra. Its omission in the MV can simply be that, because

ofthis, it does not need to be specifically taught. Abhinavais thus ree to draw from any source to

make up for its omission in the MV, and he has indeed presented the basic common form of it,
which is OM GĀṀ (or GŪAUṀ) GAṆEŚĀYA NAMAḤ.
Read with MSs Th gār for gaṅ.

“ Read with MS Th gā-auṁ for gā.

““ ] take the compound āmantritānyaghoryāditritayasya to mean literally, the ‘three beginning

with Anyaghorī who have been invoked’. The name ‘anyaghorī — literally ‘she who is other than
Ghorī’, i.e. Aghorī, is rather clumsy, or at the least, unusual.


ĀHNIKA 37
============================================================

CHAPTER THIRTY
--------------------------------------------------


tataḥ śaktidvayāmantro luptaṁ tatrāntyam akṣaram |
he ʻgnivarṇāv ubhau pañcasvarayuktau parau pr̥thak || 22. ||
akārayuktāv astraṁ huṁ ha visargo punaḥ śaraḥ |
tāreṇa saha vasvagnivarṇārdhārṇadvayādhikā || 23 ||
eṣā parāparādevyā vidyā śrītrikaśāsane |
This is the Vidyā of the Goddess Parāparā, according to the

venerable Trikaśāsana. It is made of 1) the three (goddesses) Aghorī etc.,
in the vocative (A.GHORE PARAMAGHORE GHORARŪPE), with (their)
seed-syllables uttered successively (between them). (The first is the syllable

of) Māyā with a (final) visarga (i.e. HRĪḤ), (then) HUM, and (then) the
letter H with a (final) visarga (i.e. HAH). 2) (Then) again the three vocatives
of the three goddesses (GHORAMUKHI BHĪMA BHĪṢAṆE) in due order,
(bearing mind that) in the second one, (the final letter) ‘E” is here replaced

by ‘A”. 3) Then, the invocation of the (last) two powers, of which the last

Abhinava declares that what he says is found in the venerable Trikaśāsana. Is this a reference to
a specific text? There is one instance at least in which it is clear that Abhinava is referring

generically to the Trika teaching as Trikaśāsana (see 31/50cd-51ab). Conversely, there is one

place at least where it is the name of a text. This reference is found in 4/274ab, but this too is not

fully secure, as we find there are variants in the manuscripts that cast doubt on the reading. Thus,
MS C reads srīkramapañcake in place of śrītrikaśāsane. Similarly, when Jayaratha refers to it in
his commentary, MSs Ch, Jh, and N read sśrākramapaṁcake.
However, there can be no doubt that Jayaratha considered it to be a text that Abhinava is

quoting directly, as indeed he is. Thus, introducing it, he says: nanv evam apūrvārthakathane ki
pramāṇam? ity āśaiṅkyoktam iti proktaṁ śrītrikaśāsane | tatratyam eva granthaṁ paṭhai (Now)
surely (the question arises) as to what the authority (pramāṇa) īs for this novel teaching

(apūrvārthakathana)?ī With this doubt in mind, he declares that ‘it is said in the venerable
Trikaśāsana. (He now) quotes from that text (introductory remark to 4/274cd-275ab).

But is this an independent text or a homonym? ln one place at least, Abhinava refers

generically to the Mālinīvijottara as ‘Trikaśāsana’ (see 10/277cd, which is MV 2/45cd).
Similarly, Abhinava introduces TĀ 11/47cd as being from the 7rikaśāsana. Jayaratha mentions
the MV as referring to the same notion, although admittedly, he does not quote from it directly.
There is no such reference in the printed edition of the MV. However, as we know of several

instances of missing passages, Jayaratha may well not have been wrong. Thus, here 100 it is
possible that Abhinava is referring in a generic way to the MV as ‘trikaśāsana’. But ṭthis is not so,
because the form of the Parāparā Vidyā taught there is not the same as it is here.
Parāparā Vidyā is extracted in MV 3/41cd-50ab. Abhinava’s extraction of this Vidyā is

not just a reworking of that passage. Although it is possible that he has written his own condensed
presentation drawing from a number of sources, he does not normally do this, and it would not be
in keeping with his method. It seems to me to be more likely that he is drawing from a single
source. This may be the Triśirobhairavatantra. The lines Jayaratha quotes from there in his

commentary on this passage quite possibly conclude it in the original source. He introduces them

saying: ‘That is said in the Triśirobhairava’. He may be referring to the whole passage Abhinava
is drawing from. If that is so, the diction ‘Trikaśāsana’ (literally ‘the Trika teaching) has a

general sense rather being the name of a specific text, which in this case may well be the
Trisirobhairava. Further evidence for this is the concluding passage Jayaratha quoles, that states,
as Abhinava does, that the Vidyā consists of thirty-eight syllables plus two half-letters.
“ The form ‘bhīma’ is a vocative of the masculine bhīmaḥ, which is clearly not intended. The
vocative of the feminine bhīmā is bhīme. If we read bhīmabhīṣaṇe as one word, the Sanskrit
would be correct. However, in that case, the ancillary goddess Bhīmā would not be accounted for.

It appears that a mistake occurred whereby bhīme was read as bhima. This is quite an

understandable error. The vocative bhīmabhīṣaṇe — ‘0 terrible frightening one!’” May well sound

better than bhīme bhīṣaṇe, and makes more sense to someone who may not know that eight parts

of the Vidyā correspond to ancillary goddesses.

TANTRĀLOKA

syllable is dropped (VAMA PIVA). 4) (After that come) HE and 5) then
the following two are the letter of Fire (R) both conjoined with the fifth
vowel (U) (iee. RURU), and the next two (Rs) are separate and are
conjoined with the letter A (i.e. RARA). (Then come) the Weapon (PHAT),

HUṀ, H with visarga (i.e. HAḤ), and then again the Arrow (PHAT) (i.e
HE, RURU, RARA, PHAT, HUM, HAHḤ, PHAT). Along with the Saviour
(OM) (in the beginning), it consists of thirty-eight syllables plus two halfletters (i.e. without vowels). (20-24ab)
‘The three (goddesses) Aghorī etc. are in the vocative’ (means)

AGHORE PARAMAGHORE and GHORARŪPE, ‘with (their) seed-syllables
uttered successively (between them), that is to say, are seen at the end (just

after each one of them). (Māyā) ʻwith a (fi nal) viṣarga means that here (in this

case, the seed syllable of Māyā - HRĪṀ) has no Point (and so the syllableis
HRĪḤ, not HRĪMH). Thus (we arrive at) AGHORE HRĪḤ PARAṂAGHORE,
(followed by) the seed syllable of the Armour, (HUṀ) GHORARŪPE HAḤ.
‘(Then) again, the three vocatives’, that is, GHORAMUKHI BHĪME
BHĪṢAṆE. However here ‘in the second word’, which is in the vocative, one
should make the ‘A” in the place of (the final letter) ‘E?, so that its form would
be BHĪMA. ʻ‘The invocation (of the last) two powersʼ is VAMANI and
PIBANI. ʻThe last (syllable) is the syllable ‘NI’ (which should be dropped).

Thus (we arrive at) VAMA and PIBA. After that also (comes) the Vital Breath

(H) conjoined with the right knee (of the goddess) (E) (= HE). (Then the

following) ‘two are the letter of Fireʼ, that is two Rs. The fifth vowel is U
(thus we arrive at RURU). ‘[Tḷhe next two’ are just letters of Fire (with no
added vowels) (iee. RARA). ‘The Weapon’ is PHAT. Then comes the seed-

syllable of the Armour (HUṀM), the Vital Breath with emission (HAH), and
again the Arrow, that is, the second Weapon (PHAT). ‘The Saviourʼ is OM,
which is placed at the beginning (of the Vidyā). (Thus, it consists) of thirtyeight syllables plus two ‘half-letters’, that is the letter T without vowels. That is
said in the Triśirobhairava:
‘In this way, the goddess Parāparā is adorned with eight parts (pada).
She is the Supreme Goddess (paramesśvarī), who has been extracted (as a
Vidyā) consisting of thirty-eight letters. And those who know reality (tattva)
should know that she (also) possesses two half-letters.”

TJṬṬJTTTRaTGTTTRT
TGT I 21I

pañcasṣatpañcavedākṣivahninetrākṣaraṁ padam || 24 ||
aghoryādau saptake syāt pibanyāḥ pariśiṣṭakam |

The parts (pada) (of the Vidyā) pertaining to the seven, Aghorī and

the rest, consists, respectively, of five, six, five, (four as are) the Vedas, (two

Thus, instead of vamani and pibani, the Vidyā has vama and piba.